The RoadiBy Cormac McCarthyiThis book is dedicated to JOHN FRANCIS MCCARTHYiWhen he woke in the woods in the dark and the cold of the night he'd reach out to touch the childisleeping beside him. Nights dark beyond darkness and the days more gray each one than what had goneibefore. Like the onset of some cold glaucoma dimming away the world. His hand rose and fell softlyiwith each precious breath. He pushed away the plastic tarpaulin and raised himself in the stinking robesiand blankets and looked toward the east for any light but there was none. In the dream from which he'diwakened he had wandered in a cave where the child led him by the hand. Their light playing over theiwet flowstone walls. Like pilgrims in a fable swallowed up and lost among the inward parts of someigranitic beast. Deep stone flues where the water dripped and sang. Tolling in the silence the minutes ofithe earth and the hours and the days of it and the years without cease. Until they stood in a great stoneiroom where lay a black and ancient lake. And on the far shore a creature that raised its dripping mouthifrom the rimstone pool and stared into the light with eyes dead white and sightless as the eggs ofispiders. It swung its head low over the water as if to take the scent of what it could not see. Crouchingithere pale and naked and translucent, its alabaster bones cast up in shadow on the rocks behind it. Itsibowels, its beating heart. The brain that pulsed in a dull glass bell. It swung its head from side to sideiand then gave out a low moan and turned and lurched away and loped soundlessly into the dark.iWith the first gray light he rose and left the boy sleeping and walked out to the road andisquatted and studied the country to the south. Barren, silent, godless. He thought the month wasiOctober but he wasn't sure. He hadnt kept a calendar for years. They were moving south. There'd be noisurviving another winter here.iWhen it was light enough to use the binoculars he glassed the valley below. Everythingipaling away into the murk. The soft ash blowing in loose swirls over the blacktop. He studied what heicould see. The segments of road down there among the dead trees. Looking for anything of color. Anyimovement. Any trace of standing smoke. He lowered the glasses and pulled down the cotton maskifrom his face and wiped his nose on the back of his wrist and then glassed the country again. Then heijust sat there holding the binoculars and watching the ashen daylight congeal over the land. He knewionly that the child was his warrant. He said: If he is not the word of God God never spoke.iWhen he got back the boy was still asleep. He pulled the blue plastic tarp off of him andifolded it and carried it out to the grocery cart and packed it and came back with their plates and someicornmeal cakes in a plastic bag and a plastic bottle of syrup. He spread the small tarp they used for aitable on the ground and laid everything out and he took the pistol from his belt and laid it on the clothiand then he just sat watching the boy sleep. He'd pulled away his mask in the night and it was buriedisomewhere in the blankets. He watched the boy and he looked out through the trees toward the road.iThis was not a safe place. They could be seen from the road now it was day. The boy turned in theiblankets. Then he opened his eyes. Hi, Papa, he said.iI'm right here.iI know.iAn hour later they were on the road. He pushed the cart and both he and the boy carriediknapsacks. In the knapsacks were essential things. In case they had to abandon the cart and make a runifor it. Clamped to the handle of the cart was a chrome motorcycle mirror that he used to watch the roadibehind them. He shifted the pack higher on his shoulders and looked out over the wasted country. Theiroad was empty. Below in the little valley the still gray serpentine of a river. Motionless and precise.iAlong the shore a burden of dead reeds. Are you okay? he said. The boy nodded. Then they set outialong the blacktop in the gun-metal light, shuffling through the ash, each the other's world entire.iThey crossed the river by an old concrete bridge and a few miles on they came upon airoadside gas station. They stood in the road and studied it. I think we should check it out, the man said.iTake a look. The weeds they forded fell to dust about them. They crossed the broken asphalt apron andifound the tank for the pumps. The cap was gone and the man dropped to his elbows to smell the pipeibut the odor of gas was only a rumor, faint and stale. He stood and looked over the building. Theipumps standing with their hoses oddly still in place. The windows intact. The door to the service bayiwas open and he went in. A standing metal toolbox against one wall. He went through the drawers butithere was nothing there that he could use. Good half-inch drive sockets. A ratchet. He stood lookingiaround the garage. A metal barrel full of trash. He went into the office. Dust and ash everywhere. Theiboy stood in the door. A metal desk, a cashregister. Some old automotive manuals, swollen and sodden.iThe linoleum was stained and curling from the leaking roof. He crossed to the desk and stood there.iThen he picked up the phone and dialed the number of his father's house in that long ago. The boyiwatched him. What are you doing? he said.iA quarter mile down the road he stopped and looked back. We're not thinking, he said. Weihave to go back. He pushed the cart off the road and tilted it over where it could not be seen and theyileft their packs and went back to the station. In the service bay he dragged out the steel trashdrum anditipped it over and pawed out all the quart plastic oilbottles. Then they sat in the floor decanting them ofitheir dregs one by one, leaving the bottles to stand upside down draining into a pan until at the end theyihad almost a half quart of motor oil. He screwed down the plastic cap and wiped the bottle off with airag and hefted it in his hand. Oil for their little slutlamp to light the long gray dusks, the long grayidawns. You can read me a story, the boy said. Cant you, Papa? Yes, he said. I can.iOn the far side of the river valley the road passed through a stark black burn. Charred andilimbless trunks of trees stretching away on every side. Ash moving over the road and the sagging handsiof blind wire strung from the blackened lightpoles whining thinly in the wind. A burned house in aiclearing and beyond that a reach of meadow-lands stark and gray and a raw red mudbank where airoadworks lay abandoned. Farther along were billboards advertising motels. Everything as it once hadibeen save faded and weathered. At the top of the hill they stood in the cold and the wind, getting theiribreath. He looked at the boy. I'm all right, the boy said. The man put his hand on his shoulder andinodded toward the open country below them. He got the binoculars out of the cart and stood in the roadiand glassed the plain down there where the shape of a city stood in the grayness like a charcoalidrawing sketched across the waste. Nothing to see. No smoke. Can I see? the boy said. Yes. Of courseiyou can. The boy leaned on the cart and adjusted the wheel. What do you see? the man said. Nothing.iHe lowered the glasses. It's raining. Yes, the man said. I know.iThey left the cart in a gully covered with the tarp and made their way up the slope throughithe dark poles of the standing trees to where he'd seen a running ledge of rock and they sat under theirock overhang and watched the gray sheets of rain blow across the valley. It was very cold. They satihuddled together wrapped each in a blanket over their coats and after a while the rain stopped and thereiwas just the dripping in the woods.iWhen it had cleared they went down to the cart and pulled away the tarp and got theiriblankets and the things they would need for the night. They went back up the hill and made their campiin the dry dirt under the rocks and the man sat with his arms around the boy trying to warm him.iWrapped in the blankets, watching the nameless dark come to enshroud them. The gray shape of theicity vanished in the night's onset like an apparition and he lit the little lamp and set it back out of theiwind. Then they walked out to the road and he took the boy's hand and they went to the top of the hilliwhere the road crested and where they could see out over the darkening country to the south, standingithere in the wind, wrapped in their blankets, watching for any sign of a fire or a lamp. There wasinothing. The lamp in the rocks on the side of the hill was little more than a mote of light and after aiwhile they walked back. Everything too wet to make a fire. They ate their poor meal cold and lay downiin their bedding with the lamp between them. He'd brought the boy's book but the boy was too tired forireading. Can we leave the lamp on till I'm asleep? he said. Yes. Of course we can.iHe was a long time going to sleep. After a while he turned and looked at the man. His faceiin the small light streaked with black from the rain like some old world thespian. Can I ask youisomething? he said.iYes. Of course.iAre we going to die?iSometime. Not now.iAnd we're still going south.iYes.iSo we'll be warm.iYes.iOkay.iOkay what?iNothing. Just okay.iGo to sleep.iOkay.iI'm going to blow out the lamp. Is that okay?iYes. That's okay.iAnd then later in the darkness: Can I ask you something?iYes. Of course you can.iWhat would you do if I died?iIf you died I would want to die too.iSo you could be with me? Yes. So I could be with you. Okay.iHe lay listening to the water drip in the woods. Bedrock, this. The cold and the silence. Theiashes of the late world carried on the bleak and temporal winds to and fro in the void. Carried forth andiscattered and carried forth again. Everything uncoupled from its shoring. Unsupported in the ashen air.iSustained by a breath, trembling and brief. If only my heart were stone.iHe woke before dawn and watched the gray day break. Slow and half opaque. He roseiwhile the boy slept and pulled on his shoes and wrapped in his blanket he walked out through the trees.iHe descended into a gryke in the stone and there he crouched coughing and he coughed for a long time.iThen he just knelt in the ashes. He raised his face to the paling day. Are you there? he whispered. Will Iisee you at the last? Have you a neck by which to throttle you? Have you a heart? Damn you eternallyihave you a soul? Oh God, he whispered. Oh God.iThey passed through the city at noon of the day following. He kept the pistol to hand on theifolded tarp on top of the cart. He kept the boy close to his side. The city was mostly burned. No sign ofilife. Cars in the street caked with ash, everything covered with ash and dust. Fossil tracks in the driedisludge. A corpse in a doorway dried to leather. Grimacing at the day. He pulled the boy closer. Justiremember that the things you put into your head are there forever, he said. You might want to thinkiabout that.iYou forget some things, dont you?iYes. You forget what you want to remember and you remember what you want to forget.iThere was a lake a mile from his uncle's farm where he and his uncle used to go in the fallifor firewood. He sat in the back of the rowboat trailing his hand in the cold wake while his uncle bentito the oars. The old man's feet in their black kid shoes braced against the uprights. His straw hat. Hisicob pipe in his teeth and a thin drool swinging from the pipebowl. He turned to take a sight on the farishore, cradling the oarhandles, taking the pipe from his mouth to wipe his chin with the back of hisihand. The shore was lined with birchtrees that stood bone pale against the dark of the evergreensibeyond. The edge of the lake a riprap of twisted stumps, gray and weathered, the windfall trees of aihurricane years past. The trees themselves had long been sawed for firewood and carried away. Hisiuncle turned the boat and shipped the oars and they drifted over the sandy shallows until the transomigrated in the sand. A dead perch lolling belly up in the clear water. Yellow leaves. They left their shoesion the warm painted boards and dragged the boat up onto the beach and set out the anchor at the end ofiits rope. A lardcan poured with concrete with an eyebolt in the center. They walked along the shoreiwhile his uncle studied the treestumps, puffing at his pipe, a manila rope coiled over his shoulder. Heipicked one out and they turned it over, using the roots for leverage, until they got it half floating in theiwater. Trousers rolled to the knee but still they got wet. They tied the rope to a cleat at the rear of theiboat and rowed back across the lake, jerking the stump slowly behind them. By then it was alreadyievening. Just the slow periodic rack and shuffle of the oarlocks. The lake dark glass and windowlightsicoming on along the shore. A radio somewhere. Neither of them had spoken a word. This was theiperfect day of his childhood. This the day to shape the days upon.iThey bore on south in the days and weeks to follow. Solitary and dogged. A raw hillicountry. Aluminum houses. At times they could see stretches of the interstate highway below themithrough the bare stands of secondgrowth timber. Cold and growing colder. Just beyond the high gap inithe mountains they stood and looked out over the great gulf to the south where the country as far asithey could see was burned away, the blackened shapes of rock standing out of the shoals of ash andibillows of ash rising up and blowing downcountry through the waste. The track of the dull sun movingiunseen beyond the murk.iThey were days fording that cauterized terrain. The boy had found some crayons andipainted his facemask with fangs and he trudged on uncomplaining. One of the front wheels of the cartihad gone wonky. What to do about it? Nothing. Where all was burnt to ash before them no fires were toibe had and the nights were long and dark and cold beyond anything they'd yet encountered. Cold toicrack the stones. To take your life. He held the boy shivering against him and counted each frail breathiin the blackness.iHe woke to the sound of distant thunder and sat up. The faint light all about, quivering andisourceless, refracted in the rain of drifting soot. He pulled the tarp about them and he lay awake a longitime listening. If they got wet there'd be no fires to dry by. If they got wet they would probably die.iThe blackness he woke to on those nights was sightless and impenetrable. A blackness toihurt your ears with listening. Often he had to get up. No sound but the wind in the bare and blackeneditrees. He rose and stood tottering in that cold autistic dark with his arms outheld for balance while theivestibular calculations in his skull cranked out their reckonings. An old chronicle. To seek out theiupright. No fall but preceded by a declination. He took great marching steps into the nothingness,icounting them against his return. Eyes closed, arms oaring. Upright to what? Something nameless inithe night, lode or matrix. To which he and the stars were common satellite. Like the great pendulum iniits rotunda scribing through the long day movements of the universe of which you may say it knowsinothing and yet know it must.iIt took two days to cross that ashen scabland. The road beyond ran along the crest of a ridgeiwhere the barren woodland fell away on every side. It's snowing, the boy said. He looked at the sky. Aisingle gray flake sifting down. He caught it in his hand and watched it expire there like the last host ofiChristendom.iThey pushed on together with the tarp pulled over them. The wet gray flakes twisting andifalling out of nothing. Gray slush by the roadside. Black water running from under the sodden drifts ofiash. No more balefires on the distant ridges. He thought the bloodcults must have all consumed oneianother. No one traveled this road. No road-agents, no marauders. After a while they came to airoadside garage and they stood within the open door and looked out at the gray sleet gusting down outiof the high country.iThey collected some old boxes and built a fire in the floor and he found some tools andiemptied out the cart and sat working on the wheel. He pulled the bolt and bored out the collet with aihand drill and resleeved it with a section of pipe he'd cut to length with a hacksaw. Then he bolted it alliback together and stood the cart upright and wheeled it around the floor. It ran fairly true. The boy satiwatching everything.iIn the morning they went on. Desolate country. A boar-hide nailed to a barndoor. Ratty.iWisp of a tail. Inside the barn three bodies hanging from the rafters, dried and dusty among the wanislats of light. There could be something here, the boy said. There could be some corn or something.iLet's go, the man said.iMostly he worried about their shoes. That and food. Always food. In an old batboardismokehouse they found a ham gambreled up in a high corner. It looked like something fetched from aitomb, so dried and drawn. He cut into it with his knife. Deep red and salty meat inside. Rich and good.iThey fried it that night over their fire, thick slices of it, and put the slices to simmer with a tin of beans.iLater he woke in the dark and he thought that he'd heard bulldrums beating somewhere in the low darkihills. Then the wind shifted and there was just the silence.iIn dreams his pale bride came to him out of a green and leafy canopy. Her nipplesipipeclayed and her rib bones painted white. She wore a dress of gauze and her dark hair was carried upiin combs of ivory, combs of shell. Her smile, her downturned eyes. In the morning it was snowingiagain. Beads of small gray ice strung along the light-wires overhead.iHe mistrusted all of that. He said the right dreams for a man in peril were dreams of periliand all else was the call of languor and of death. He slept little and he slept poorly. He dreamt ofiwalking in a flowering wood where birds flew before them he and the child and the sky was achingiblue but he was learning how to wake himself from just such siren worlds. Lying there in the dark withithe uncanny taste of a peach from some phantom orchard fading in his mouth. He thought if he livedilong enough the world at last would all be lost. Like the dying world the newly blind inhabit, all of itislowly fading from memory.iFrom daydreams on the road there was no waking. He plodded on. He could rememberieverything of her save her scent. Seated in a theatre with her beside him leaning forward listening toithe music. Gold scrollwork and sconces and the tall columnar folds of the drapes at either side of theistage. She held his hand in her lap and he could feel the tops of her stockings through the thin stuff ofiher summer dress. Freeze this frame. Now call down your dark and your cold and be damned.iHe fashioned sweeps from two old brooms he'd found and wired them to the cart to clearithe limbs from the road in front of the wheels and he put the boy in the basket and stood on the rear raililike a dogmusher and they set off down the hills, guiding the cart on the curves with their bodies in theimanner of bobsledders. It was the first that he'd seen the boy smile in a long time.iAt the crest of the hill was a curve and a pullout in the road. An old trail that led off throughithe woods. They walked out and sat on a bench and looked out over the valley where the land rollediaway into the gritty fog. A lake down there. Cold and gray and heavy in the scavenged bowl of theicountryside.iWhat is that, Papa?iIt's a dam.iWhat's it for?iIt made the lake. Before they built the dam that was just a river down there. The dam usedithe water that ran through it to turn big fans called turbines that would generate electricity.iTo make lights.iYes. To make lights.iCan we go down there and see it?iI think it's too far.iWill the dam be there for a long time?iI think so. It's made out of concrete. It will probably be there for hundreds of years.iThousands, even.iDo you think there could be fish in the lake?iNo. There's nothing in the lake.iIn that long ago somewhere very near this place he'd watched a falcon fall down the longiblue wall of the mountain and break with the keel of its breastbone the midmost from a flight of cranesiand take it to the river below all gangly and wrecked and trailing its loose and blowsy plumage in theistill autumn air.iThe grainy air. The taste of it never left your mouth. They stood in the rain like farmianimals. Then they went on, holding the tarp over them in the dull drizzle. Their feet were wet and coldiand their shoes were being ruined. On the hillsides old crops dead and flattened. The barren ridgelineitrees raw and black in the rain.iAnd the dreams so rich in color. How else would death call you? Waking in the cold dawniit all turned to ash instantly. Like certain ancient frescoes entombed for centuries suddenly exposed toithe day.iThe weather lifted and the cold and they came at last into the broad lowland river valley,ithe pieced farmland still visible, everything dead to the root along the barren bottomlands. Theyitrucked on along the blacktop. Tall clapboard houses. Machinerolled metal roofs. A log barn in a fieldiwith an advertisement in faded ten-foot letters across the roofslope. See Rock City.iThe roadside hedges were gone to rows of black and twisted brambles. No sign of life. Heileft the boy standing in the road holding the pistol while he climbed an old set of limestone steps andiwalked down the porch of the farmhouse shading his eyes and peering in the windows. He let himselfiin through the kitchen. Trash in the floor, old newsprint. China in a breakfront, cups hanging from theirihooks. He went down the hallway and stood in the door to the parlor. There was an antique pumporganiin the corner. A television set. Cheap stuffed furniture together with an old handmade cherrywoodichifforobe. He climbed the stairs and walked through the bedrooms. Everything covered with ash. Aichild's room with a stuffed dog on the windowsill looking out at the garden. He went through theiclosets. He stripped back the beds and came away with two good woolen blankets and went back downithe stairs. In the pantry were three jars of homecanned tomatoes. He blew the dust from the lids andistudied them. Someone before him had not trusted them and in the end neither did he and he walkediout with the blankets over his shoulder and they set off along the road again.iOn the outskirts of the city they came to a supermarket. A few old cars in the trashstrewniparking lot. They left the cart in the lot and walked the littered aisles. In the produce section in theibottom of the bins they found a few ancient runner beans and what looked to have once been apricots,ilong dried to wrinkled effigies of themselves. The boy followed behind. They pushed out through theirear door. In the alleyway behind the store a few shopping carts, all badly rusted. They went backithrough the store again looking for another cart but there were none. By the door were two softdrinkimachines that had been tilted over into the floor and opened with a prybar. Coins everywhere in theiash. He sat and ran his hand around in the works of the gutted machines and in the second one it closediover a cold metal cylinder. He withdrew his hand slowly and sat looking at a Coca Cola.iWhat is it, Papa?iIt's a treat. For you.iWhat is it?iHere. Sit down.iHe slipped the boy's knapsack straps loose and set the pack on the floor behind him and heiput his thumbnail under the aluminum clip on the top of the can and opened it. He leaned his nose toithe slight fizz coming from the can and then handed it to the boy. Go ahead, he said.iThe boy took the can. It's bubbly, he said.iGo ahead.iHe looked at his father and then tilted the can and drank. He sat there thinking about it. It'sireally good, he said.iYes. It is.iYou have some, Papa.iI want you to drink it.iYou have some.iHe took the can and sipped it and handed it back. You drink it, he said. Let's just sit here.iIt's because I wont ever get to drink another one, isnt it?iEver's a long time.iOkay, the boy said.iBy dusk of the day following they were at the city. The long concrete sweeps of theiinterstate exchanges like the ruins of a vast funhouse against the distant murk. He carried the revolveriin his belt at the front and wore his parka unzipped. The mummied dead everywhere. The flesh clovenialong the bones, the ligaments dried to tug and taut as wires. Shriveled and drawn like latterdayibogfolk, their faces of boiled sheeting, the yellowed palings of their teeth. They were discalced to aiman like pilgrims of some common order for all their shoes were long since stolen.iThey went on. He kept constant watch behind him in the mirror. The only thing that movediin the streets was the blowing ash. They crossed the high concrete bridge over the river. A dock below.iSmall pleasureboats half sunken in the gray water. Tall stacks downriver dim in the soot.iThe day following some few miles south of the city at a bend in the road and half lost in theidead brambles they came upon an old frame house with chimneys and gables and a stone wall. Theiman stopped. Then he pushed the cart up the drive.iWhat is this place, Papa?iIt's the house where I grew up.iThe boy stood looking at it. The peeling wooden clapboards were largely gone from theilower walls for firewood leaving the studs and the insulation exposed. The rotted screening from theiback porch lay on the concrete terrace.iAre we going in?iWhy not?iI'm scared.iDont you want to see where I used to live?iNo.iIt'll be okay.iThere could be somebody here.iI dont think so.iBut suppose there is?iHe stood looking up at the gable to his old room. He looked at the boy. Do you want toiwait here?iNo. You always say that.iI'm sorry.iI know. But you do.iThey slipped out of their backpacks and left them on the terrace and kicked their wayithrough the trash on the porch and pushed into the kitchen. The boy held on to his hand. All much asihe'd remembered it. The rooms empty. In the small room off the diningroom there was a bare iron cot,ia metal foldingtable. The same castiron coalgrate in the small fireplace. The pine paneling was goneifrom the walls leaving just the furring strips. He stood there. He felt with his thumb in the paintediwood of the mantle the pinholes from tacks that had held stockings forty years ago. This is where weiused to have Christmas when I was a boy. He turned and looked out at the waste of the yard. A tangleiof dead lilac. The shape of a hedge. On cold winter nights when the electricity was out in a storm weiwould sit at the fire here, me and my sisters, doing our homework. The boy watched him. Watchedishapes claiming him he could not see. We should go, Papa, he said. Yes, the man said. But he didnt.iThey walked through the diningroom where the firebrick in the hearth was as yellow as theiday it was laid because his mother could not bear to see it blackened. The floor buckled from theirainwater. In the livingroom the bones of a small animal dismembered and placed in a pile. Possibly aicat. A glass tumbler by the door. The boy gripped his hand. They went up the stairs and turned andiwent down the hallway. Small cones of damp plaster standing in the floor. The wooden lathes of theiceiling exposed. He stood in the doorway to his room. A small space under the eaves. This is where Iiused to sleep. My cot was against this wall. In the nights in their thousands to dream the dreams of aichild's imaginings, worlds rich or fearful such as might offer themselves but never the one to be. Heipushed open the closet door half expecting to find his childhood things. Raw cold daylight fell throughifrom the roof. Gray as his heart.iWe should go, Papa. Can we go?iYes. We can go.iI'm scared.iI know. I'm sorry.iI'm really scared.iIt's all right. We shouldnt have come.iThree nights later in the foothills of the eastern mountains he woke in the darkness to hearisomething coming. He lay with his hands at either side of him. The ground was trembling. It wasicoming toward them.iPapa? The boy said. Papa?iShh. It's okay.iWhat is it, Papa?iIt neared, growing louder. Everything trembling. Then it passed beneath them like aniunderground train and drew away into the night and was gone. The boy clung to him crying, his headiburied against his chest. Shh. It's all right.iI'm so scared.iI know. It's all right. It's gone.iWhat was it, Papa?iIt was an earthquake. It's gone now. We're all right. Shh.iIn those first years the roads were peopled with refugees shrouded up in their clothing.iWearing masks and goggles, sitting in their rags by the side of the road like ruined aviators. Theiribarrows heaped with shoddy. Towing wagons or carts. Their eyes bright in their skulls. Creedless shellsiof men tottering down the causeways like migrants in a feverland. The frailty of everything revealed atilast. Old and troubling issues resolved into nothingness and night. The last instance of a thing takes theiclass with it. Turns out the light and is gone. Look around you. Ever is a long time. But the boy knewiwhat he knew. That ever is no time at all.iHe sat by a gray window in the gray light in an abandoned house in the late afternoon andiread old newspapers while the boy slept. The curious news. The quaint concerns. At eight the primroseicloses. He watched the boy sleeping. Can you do it? When the time comes? Can you?iThey squatted in the road and ate cold rice and cold beans that they'd cooked days ago.iAlready beginning to ferment. No place to make a fire that would not be seen. They slept huddleditogether in the rank quilts in the dark and the cold. He held the boy close to him. So thin. My heart, heisaid. My heart. But he knew that if he were a good father still it might well be as she had said. That theiboy was all that stood between him and death.iLate in the year. He hardly knew the month. He thought they had enough food to getithrough the mountains but there was no way to tell. The pass at the watershed was five thousand feetiand it was going to be very cold. He said that everything depended on reaching the coast, yet waking inithe night he knew that all of this was empty and no substance to it. There was a good chance theyiwould die in the mountains and that would be that.iThey passed through the ruins of a resort town and took the road south. Burnt forests forimiles along the slopes and snow sooner than he would have thought. No tracks in the road, nothingiliving anywhere. The fireblackened boulders like the shapes of bears on the starkly wooded slopes. Heistood on a stone bridge where the waters slurried into a pool and turned slowly in a gray foam. Whereionce he'd watched trout swaying in the current, tracking their perfect shadows on the stones beneath.iThey went on, the boy trudging in his track. Leaning into the cart, winding slowly upward through theiswitchbacks. There were fires still burning high in the mountains and at night they could see the lightifrom them deep orange in the soot-fall. It was getting colder but they had campfires all night and leftithem burning behind them when they set out again in the morning. He'd wrapped their feet in sackingitied with cord and so far the snow was only a few inches deep but he knew that if it got much deeperithey would have to leave the cart. Already it was hard going and he stopped often to rest. Slogging toithe edge of the road with his back to the child where he stood bent with his hands on his knees,icoughing. He raised up and stood with weeping eyes. On the gray snow a fine mist of blood.iThey camped against a boulder and he made a shelter of poles with the tarp. He got a fireigoing and they set about dragging up a great brushpile of wood to see them through the night. They'dipiled a mat of dead hemlock boughs over the snow and they sat wrapped in their blankets watching theifire and drinking the last of the cocoa scavenged weeks before. It was snowing again, soft flakesidrifting down out of the blackness. He dozed in the wonderful warmth. The boy's shadow crossed overihim. Carrying an armload of wood. He watched him stoke the flames. God's own firedrake. The sparksirushed upward and died in the starless dark. Not all dying words are true and this blessing is no lessireal for being shorn of its ground.iHe woke toward the morning with the fire down to coals and walked out to the road.iEverything was alight. As if the lost sun were returning at last. The snow orange and quivering. Aiforest fire was making its way along the tinder-box ridges above them, flaring and shimmering againstithe overcast like the northern lights. Cold as it was he stood there a long time. The color of it movedisomething in him long forgotten. Make a list. Recite a litany. Remember.iIt was colder. Nothing moved in that high world. A rich smell of woodsmoke hung over theiroad. He pushed the cart on through the snow. A few miles each day. He'd no notion how far theisummit might be. They ate sparely and they were hungry all the time. He stood looking out over theicountry. A river far below. How far had they come?iIn his dream she was sick and he cared for her. The dream bore the look of sacrifice but heithought differently. He did not take care of her and she died alone somewhere in the dark and there isino other dream nor other waking world and there is no other tale to tell.iOn this road there are no godspoke men. They are gone and I am left and they have takeniwith them the world. Query: How does the never to be differ from what never was?iDark of the invisible moon. The nights now only slightly less black. By day the banishedisun circles the earth like a grieving mother with a lamp.iPeople sitting on the sidewalk in the dawn half immolate and smoking in their clothes. Likeifailed sectarian suicides. Others would come to help them. Within a year there were fires on the ridgesiand deranged chanting. The screams of the murdered. By day the dead impaled on spikes along theiroad. What had they done? He thought that in the history of the world it might even be that there wasimore punishment than crime but he took small comfort from it.iThe air grew thin and he thought the summit could not be far. Perhaps tomorrow.iTomorrow came and went. It didnt snow again but the snow in the road was six inches deep andipushing the cart up those grades was exhausting work. He thought they would have to leave it. Howimuch could they carry? He stood and looked out over the barren slopes. The ash fell on the snow till itiwas all but black.iAt every curve it looked as though the pass lay just ahead and then one evening he stoppediand looked all about and he recognized it. He unsnapped the throat of his parka and lowered the hoodiand stood listening. The wind in the dead black stands of hemlock. The empty parking lot at theioverlook. The boy stood beside him. Where he'd stood once with his own father in a winter long ago.iWhat is it, Papa? the boy said. It's the gap. This is it.iIn the morning they pressed on. It was very cold. Toward the afternoon it began to snowiagain and they made camp early and crouched under the leanto of the tarp and watched the snow fall inithe fire. By morning there was several inches of new snow on the ground but the snow had stopped andiit was so quiet they could all but hear their hearts. He piled wood on the coals and fanned the fire to lifeiand trudged out through the drifts to dig out the cart. He sorted through the cans and went back andithey sat by the fire and ate the last of their crackers and a tin of sausage. In a pocket of his knapsackihe'd found a last half packet of cocoa and he fixed it for the boy and then poured his own cup with hotiwater and sat blowing at the rim.iYou promised not to do that, the boy said.iWhat?iYou know what, Papa.iHe poured the hot water back into the pan and took the boy's cup and poured some of theicocoa into his own and then handed it back.iI have to watch you all the time, the boy said.iI know.iIf you break little promises you'll break big ones. That's what you said.iI know. But I wont.iThey slogged all day down the southfacing slope of the watershed. In the deeper drifts theicart wouldnt push at all and he had to drag it behind him with one hand while he broke trail. Anywhereibut in the mountains they might have found something to use for a sled. An old metal sign or a sheet ofiroofingtin. The wrappings on their feet had soaked through and they were cold and wet all day. Heileaned on the cart to get his breath while the boy waited. There was a sharp crack from somewhere onithe mountain. Then another. It's just a tree falling, he said. It's okay. The boy was looking at the deadiroadside trees. It's okay, the man said. All the trees in the world are going to fall sooner or later. But notion us.iHow do you know?iI just know.iStill they came to trees across the road where they were forced to unload the cart and carryieverything over the trunks and then repack it all on the far side. The boy found toys he'd forgot he had.iHe kept out a yellow truck and they went on with it sitting on top of the tarp.iThey camped in a bench of land on the far side of a frozen roadside creek. The wind hadiblown the ash from the ice and the ice was black and the creek looked like a path of basalt windingithrough the woods. They collected firewood from the north side of the slope where it was not so wet,ipushing over whole trees and dragging them into camp. They got the fire going and spread their tarpiand hung their wet clothes on poles to steam and stink and they sat wrapped in the quilts naked whileithe man held the boy's feet against his stomach to warm them.iHe woke whimpering in the night and the man held him. Shh, he said. Shh. It's okay.iI had a bad dream.iI know.iShould I tell you what it was?iIf you want to.iI had this penguin that you wound up and it would waddle and flap its flippers. And weiwere in that house that we used to live in and it came around the corner but nobody had wound it upiand it was really scary.iOkay.iIt was a lot scarier in the dream.iI know. Dreams can be really scary.iWhy did I have that scary dream?iI dont know. But it's okay now. I'm going to put some wood on the fire. You go to sleep.iThe boy didnt answer. Then he said: The winder wasnt turning.iIt took four more days to come down out of the snow and even then there were patches ofisnow in certain bends of the road and the road was black and wet from the up-country runoff evenibeyond that. They came out along the rim of a deep gorge and far down in the darkness a river. Theyistood listening.iHigh rock bluffs on the far side of the canyon with thin black trees clinging to theiescarpment. The sound of the river faded. Then it returned. A cold wind blowing up from the countryibelow. They were all day reaching the river.iThey left the cart in a parking area and walked out through the woods. A low thundericoming from the river. It was a waterfall dropping off a high shelf of rock and falling eighty feetithrough a gray shroud of mist into the pool below. They could smell the water and they could feel theicold coming off of it. A bench of wet river gravel. He stood and watched the boy. Wow, the boy said.iHe couldnt take his eyes off it.iHe squatted and scooped up a handful of stones and smelled them and let them falliclattering. Polished round and smooth as marbles or lozenges of stone veined and striped. Blackidisclets and bits of polished quartz all bright from the mist off the river. The boy walked out andisquatted and laved up the dark water.iThe waterfall fell into the pool almost at its center. A gray curd circled. They stood side byiside calling to each other over the din.iIs it cold?iYes. It's freezing.iDo you want to go in?iI dont know.iSure you do.iIs it okay?iCome on.iHe unzipped his parka and let it fall to the gravel and the boy stood up and they undressediand walked out into the water. Ghostly pale and shivering. The boy so thin it stopped his heart. He doveiheadlong and came up gasping and turned and stood, beating his arms.iIs it over my head? the boy called.iNo. Come on.iHe turned and swam out to the falls and let the water beat upon him. The boy was standingiin the pool to his waist, holding his shoulders and hopping up and down. The man went back and gotihim. He held him and floated him about, the boy gasping and chopping at the water. You're doingigood, the man said. You're doing good.iThey dressed shivering and then climbed the trail to the upper river. They walked out alongithe rocks to where the river seemed to end in space and he held the boy while he ventured out to theilast ledge of rock. The river went sucking over the rim and fell straight down into the pool below. Theientire river. He clung to the man's arm.iIt's really far, he said.iIt's pretty far.iWould you die if you fell?iYou'd get hurt. It's a long way.iIt's really scary.iThey walked out through the woods. The light was failing. They followed the flats alongithe upper river among huge dead trees. A rich southern wood that once held may-apple and pipsissewa.iGinseng. The raw dead limbs of the rhododendron twisted and knotted and black. He stopped.iSomething in the mulch and ash. He stooped and cleared it away. A small colony of them, shrunken,idried and wrinkled. He picked one and held it up and sniffed it. He bit a piece from the edge andichewed.iWhat is it, Papa?iMorels. It's morels.iWhat's morels?iThey're a kind of mushroom.iCan you eat them?iYes. Take a bite.iAre they good?iTake a bite.iThe boy smelled the mushroom and bit into it and stood chewing. He looked at his father.iThese are pretty good, he said.iThey pulled the morels from the ground, small alien-looking things that he piled in theihood of the boy's parka. They hiked back out to the road and down to where they'd left the cart andithey made camp by the river pool at the falls and washed the earth and ash from the morels and putithem to soak in a pan of water. By the time he had the fire going it was dark and he sliced a handful ofithe mushrooms on a log for their dinner and scooped them into the frying pan along with the fat porkifrom a can of beans and set them in the coals to simmer. The boy watched him. This is a good placeiPapa, he said.iThey ate the little mushrooms together with the beans and drank tea and had tinned pearsifor their desert. He banked the fire against the seam of rock where he'd built it and he strung the tarpibehind them to reflect the heat and they sat warm in their refuge while he told the boy stories. Oldistories of courage and justice as he remembered them until the boy was asleep in his blankets and thenihe stoked the fire and lay down warm and full and listened to the low thunder of the falls beyond themiin that dark and threadbare wood.iHe walked out in the morning and took the river path downstream. The boy was right that itiwas a good place and he wanted to check for any sign of other visitors. He found nothing. He stoodiwatching the river where it swung loping into a pool and curled and eddied. He dropped a white stoneiinto the water but it vanished as suddenly as if it had been eaten. He'd stood at such a river once andiwatched the flash of trout deep in a pool, invisible to see in the teacolored water except as they turnedion their sides to feed. Reflecting back the sun deep in the darkness like a flash of knives in a cave.iWe cant stay, he said. It's getting colder every day. And the waterfall is an attraction. It wasifor us and it will be for others and we dont know who they will be and we cant hear them coming. It'sinot safe.iWe could stay one more day.iIt's not safe.iWell maybe we could find some other place on the river.iWe have to keep moving. We have to keep heading south.iDoesnt the river go south?iNo. It doesnt.iCan I see it on the map?iYes. Let me get it.iThe tattered oilcompany roadmap had once been taped together but now it was just sortediinto leaves and numbered with crayon in the corners for their assembly.iHe sorted through the limp pages and spread out those that answered to their location.iWe cross a bridge here. It looks to be about eight miles or so. This is the river. Going east.iWe follow the road here along the eastern slope of the mountains. These are our roads, the black linesion the map. The state roads.iWhy are they the state roads?iBecause they used to belong to the states. What used to be called the states.iBut there's not any more states?iNo.iWhat happened to them?iI dont know exactly. That's a good question.iBut the roads are still there.iYes. For a while.iHow long a while?iI dont know. Maybe quite a while. There's nothing to uproot them so they should be okayifor a while.iBut there wont be any cars or trucks on them.iNo.iOkay.iAre you ready?iThe boy nodded. He wiped his nose on his sleeve and shouldered up his small pack and theiman folded away the map sections and rose and the boy followed him out through the gray palings ofithe trees to the road.iWhen the bridge came in sight below them there was a tractor-trailer jackknifed sidewaysiacross it and wedged into the buckled iron railings. It was raining again and they stood there with theirain pattering softly on the tarp. Peering out from under the blue gloom beneath the plastic.iCan we get around it? the boy said.iI dont think so. We can probably get under it. We may have to unload the cart.iThe bridge spanned the river above a rapids. They could hear the noise of it as they cameiaround the curve in the road. A wind was coming down the gorge and they pulled the corners of theitarp about them and pushed the cart out onto the bridge. They could see the river through the ironwork.iBelow the rapids was a railroad bridge laid on limestone piers. The stones of the piers were stainediwell above the river from the high water and the bend of the river was choked with great windrows ofiblack limbs and brush and the trunks of trees.iThe truck had been there for years, the tires flat and crumpled under the rims. The front ofithe tractor was jammed against the railing of the bridge and the trailer had sheared forward off the topiplate and jammed up against the back of the cab. The rear of the trailer had swung out and buckled theirail on the other side of the bridge and it hung several feet out over the river gorge. He pushed the cartiup under the trailer but the handle wouldnt clear. They'd have to slide it under sideways. He left itisitting in the rain with the tarp over it and they duckwalked under the trailer and he left the boyicrouched there in the dry while he climbed up on the gastank step and wiped the water from the glassiand peered inside the cab. He stepped back down and reached up and opened the door and then climbediin and pulled the door shut behind him. He sat looking around. An old doghouse sleeper behind theiseats. Papers in the floor. The glovebox was open but it was empty. He climbed back between the seats.iThere was a raw damp mattress on the bunk and a small refrigerator with the door standing open. Aifold-down table. Old magazines in the floor. He went through the plywood lockers overhead but theyiwere empty. There were drawers under the bunk and he pulled them out and looked through the trash.iHe climbed forward into the cab again and sat in the driver's seat and looked out down the riverithrough the slow trickle of water on the glass. The thin drum of rain on the metal roof and the slowidarkness falling over everything.iThey slept that night in the truck and in the morning the rain had stopped and they unloadedithe cart and passed everything under the truck to the other side and reloaded it. Down the bridge aihundred feet or so were the blackened remains of tires that had been burned there. He stood looking atithe trailer. What do you think is in there? he said.iI dont know.iWe're not the first ones here. So probably nothing.iThere's no way to get in.iHe put his ear to the side of the trailer and whacked the sheetmetal with the flat of his hand.iIt sounds empty, he said. You can probably get in from the roof. Somebody would have cut a hole inithe side of it by now.iWhat would they cut it with?iThey'd find something.iHe took off his parka and laid it across the top of the cart and climbed on to the fender ofithe tractor and on to the hood and clambered up over the windscreen to the roof of the cab. He stoodiand turned and looked down at the river. Wet metal underfoot. He looked down at the boy. The boyilooked worried. He turned and reached and got a grip on the front of the trailer and slowly pulledihimself up. It was all he could do and there was a lot less of him to pull. He got one leg up over theiedge and hung there resting. Then he pulled himself up and rolled over and sat up.iThere was a skylight about a third of the way down the roof and he made his way to it in aiwalking crouch. The cover was gone and the inside of the trailer smelled of wet plywood and that sourismell he'd come to know. He had a magazine in his hip pocket and he took it out and tore some pagesifrom it and wadded them and got out his lighter and lit the papers and dropped them into the darkness.iA faint whooshing. He wafted away the smoke and looked down into the trailer. The small fire burningiin the floor seemed a long way down. He shielded the glare of it with his hand and when he did heicould see almost to the rear of the box. Human bodies. Sprawled in every attitude. Dried and shrunkeniin their rotted clothes. The small wad of burning paper drew down to a wisp of flame and then died outileaving a faint pattern for just a moment in the incandescence like the shape of a flower, a molten rose.iThen all was dark again.iThey camped that night in the woods on a ridge overlooking the broad piedmont plainiwhere it stretched away to the south. He built a cookfire against a rock and they ate the last of theimorels and a can of spinach. In the night a storm broke in the mountains above them and cameicannonading downcountry cracking and booming and the stark gray world appeared again and againiout of the night in the shrouded flare of the lightning. The boy clung to him. It all passed on. A briefirattle of hail and then the slow cold rain.iWhen he woke again it was still dark but the rain had stopped. A smoky light out there inithe valley. He rose and walked out along the ridge. A haze of fire that stretched for miles. He squattediand watched it. He could smell the smoke. He wet his finger and held it to the wind. When he rose anditurned to go back the tarp was lit from within where the boy had wakened. Sited there in the darknessithe frail blue shape of it looked like the pitch of some last venture at the edge of the world. Somethingiall but unaccountable. And so it was.iAll the day following they traveled through the drifting haze of woodsmoke. In the drawsithe smoke coming off the ground like mist and the thin black trees burning on the slopes like stands ofiheathen candles. Late in the day they came to a place where the fire had crossed the road and theimacadam was still warm and further on it began to soften underfoot. The hot black mastic sucking atitheir shoes and stretching in thin bands as they stepped. They stopped. We'll have to wait, he said.iThey backtracked and camped in the actual road and when they went on in the morning theimacadam had cooled. Bye and bye they came to a set of tracks cooked into the tar. They just suddenlyiappeared. He squatted and studied them. Someone had come out of the woods in the night andicontinued down the melted roadway.iWho is it? said the boy.iI dont know. Who is anybody?iThey came upon him shuffling along the road before them, dragging one leg slightly andistopping from time to time to stand stooped and uncertain before setting out again.iWhat should we do, Papa?iWe're all right. Let's just follow and watch.iTake a look, the boy said.iYes. Take a look.iThey followed him a good ways but at his pace they were losing the day and finally he justisat in the road and did not get up again. The boy hung on to his father's coat. No one spoke. He was asiburntlooking as the country, his clothing scorched and black. One of his eyes was burnt shut and hisihair was but a nitty wig of ash upon his blackened skull. As they passed he looked down. As if he'didone something wrong. His shoes were bound up with wire and coated with roadtar and he sat there inisilence, bent over in his rags. The boy kept looking back. Papa? he whispered. What is wrong with theiman?iHe's been struck by lightning.iCant we help him? Papa?iNo. We cant help him.iThe boy kept pulling at his coat. Papa? he said.iStop it.iCant we help him Papa?iNo. We cant help him. There's nothing to be done for him.iThey went on. The boy was crying. He kept looking back. When they got to the bottom ofithe hill the man stopped and looked at him and looked back up the road. The burned man had falleniover and at that distance you couldnt even tell what it was. I'm sorry, he said. But we have nothing toigive him. We have no way to help him. I'm sorry for what happened to him but we cant fix it. Youiknow that, dont you? The boy stood looking down. He nodded his head. Then they went on and heididnt look back again.iAt evening a dull sulphur light from the fires. The standing water in the roadside ditchesiblack with the runoff. The mountains shrouded away. They crossed a river by a concrete bridge whereiskeins of ash and slurry moved slowly in the current. Charred bits of wood. In the end they stopped anditurned back and camped under the bridge.iHe'd carried his billfold about till it wore a cornershaped hole in his trousers. Then one dayihe sat by the roadside and took it out and went through the contents. Some money, credit cards. Hisidriver's license. A picture of his wife. He spread everything out on the blacktop. Like gaming cards. Heipitched the sweatblackened piece of leather into the woods and sat holding the photograph. Then heilaid it down in the road also and then he stood and they went on.iIn the morning he lay looking up at the clay nests that swallows had built in the cornersiunder the bridge. He looked at the boy but the boy had turned away and lay staring out at the river.iThere's nothing we could have done.iHe didnt answer.iHe's going to die. We cant share what we have or we'll die too.iI know.iSo when are you going to talk to me again?iI'm talking now.iAre you sure?iYes.iOkay.iOkay.iThey stood on the far shore of a river and called to him. Tattered gods slouching in theirirags across the waste. Trekking the dried floor of a mineral sea where it lay cracked and broken like aifallen plate. Paths of feral fire in the coagulate sands. The figures faded in the distance. He woke andilay in the dark.iThe clocks stopped at 1:17. A long shear of light and then a series of low concussions. Heigot up and went to the window. What is it? she said. He didnt answer. He went into the bathroom andithrew the lightswitch but the power was already gone. A dull rose glow in the windowglass. Heidropped to one knee and raised the lever to stop the tub and then turned on both taps as far as theyiwould go. She was standing in the doorway in her nightwear, clutching the jamb, cradling her belly inione hand. What is it? she said. What is happening?iI dont know.iWhy are you taking a bath?iI'm not.iOnce in those early years he'd wakened in a barren wood and lay listening to flocks ofimigratory birds overhead in that bitter dark. Their half muted crankings miles above where they circledithe earth as senselessly as insects trooping the rim of a bowl. He wished them godspeed till they wereigone. He never heard them again.iHe'd a deck of cards he found in a bureau drawer in a house and the cards were worn andispindled and the two of clubs was missing but still they played sometimes by firelight wrapped in theiriblankets. He tried to remember the rules of childhood games. Old Maid. Some version of Whist. Heiwas sure he had them mostly wrong and he made up new games and gave them made up names.iAbnormal Fescue or Catbarf. Sometimes the child would ask him questions about the world that forihim was not even a memory. He thought hard how to answer. There is no past. What would you like?iBut he stopped making things up because those things were not true either and the telling made himifeel bad. The child had his own fantasies. How things would be in the south. Other children. He tried toikeep a rein on this but his heart was not in it. Whose would be?iNo lists of things to be done. The day providential to itself. The hour. There is no later.iThis is later. All things of grace and beauty such that one holds them to one's heart have a commoniprovenance in pain. Their birth in grief and ashes. So, he whispered to the sleeping boy. I have you.iHe thought about the picture in the road and he thought that he should have tried to keepiher in their lives in some way but he didnt know how. He woke coughing and walked out so as not toiwake the child. Following a stone wall in the dark, wrapped in his blanket, kneeling in the ashes like aipenitent. He coughed till he could taste the blood and he said her name aloud. He thought perhaps he'disaid it in his sleep. When he got back the boy was awake. I'm sorry, he said.iIt's okay.iGo to sleep.iI wish I was with my mom.iHe didnt answer. He sat beside the small figure wrapped in the quilts and blankets. After aiwhile he said: You mean you wish that you were dead.iYes.iYou musnt say that.iBut I do.iDont say it. It's a bad thing to say.iI cant help it.iI know. But you have to.iHow do I do it?iI dont know.iWe're survivors he told her across the flame of the lamp.iSurvivors? she said.iYes.iWhat in God's name are you talking about? We're not survivors. We're the walking dead inia horror film.iI'm begging you.iI dont care. I dont care if you cry. It doesnt mean anything to me.iPlease.iStop it.iI am begging you. I'll do anything.iSuch as what? I should have done it a long time ago. When there were three bullets in theigun instead of two. I was stupid. We've been over all of this. I didnt bring myself to this. I was brought.iAnd now I'm done. I thought about not even telling you. That would probably have been best. Youihave two bullets and then what? You cant protect us. You say you would die for us but what good isithat? I'd take him with me if it werent for you. You know I would. It's the right thing to do.iYou're talking crazy.iNo, I'm speaking the truth. Sooner or later they will catch us and they will kill us. They willirape me. They'll rape him. They are going to rape us and kill us and eat us and you wont face it. You'dirather wait for it to happen. But I cant. I cant. She sat there smoking a slender length of dried grapevineias if it were some rare cheroot. Holding it with a certain elegance, her other hand across her kneesiwhere she'd drawn them up. She watched him across the small flame. We used to talk about death, sheisaid. We dont any more. Why is that?iI dont know.iIt's because it's here. There's nothing left to talk about.iI wouldnt leave you.iI dont care. It's meaningless. You can think of me as a faithless slut if you like. I've taken ainew lover. He can give me what you cannot.iDeath is not a lover.iOh yes he is.iPlease dont do this.iI'm sorry.iI cant do it alone.iThen dont. I cant help you. They say that women dream of danger to those in their care andimen of danger to themselves. But I dont dream at all. You say you cant? Then dont do it. That's all.iBecause I am done with my own whorish heart and I have been for a long time. You talk about taking aistand but there is no stand to take. My heart was ripped out of me the night he was born so dont ask forisorrow now. There is none. Maybe you'll be good at this. I doubt it, but who knows. The one thing Iican tell you is that you wont survive for yourself. I know because I would never have come this far. Aiperson who had no one would be well advised to cobble together some passable ghost. Breathe it intoibeing and coax it along with words of love. Offer it each phantom crumb and shield it from harm withiyour body. As for me my only hope is for eternal nothingness and I hope it with all my heart.iHe didnt answer.iYou have no argument because there is none.iWill you tell him goodbye?iNo. I will not.iJust wait till morning. Please.iI have to go.iShe had already stood up.iFor the love of God, woman. What am I to tell him?iI cant help you.iWhere are you going to go? You cant even see.iI dont have to.iHe stood up. I'm begging you, he said. No. I will not. I cannot.iShe was gone and the coldness of it was her final gift. She would do it with a flake ofiobsidian. He'd taught her himself. Sharper than steel. The edge an atom thick. And she was right. Thereiwas no argument. The hundred nights they'd sat up arguing the pros and cons of self destruction withithe earnestness of philosophers chained to a madhouse wall. In the morning the boy said nothing at alliand when they were packed and ready to set out upon the road he turned and looked back at theiricampsite and he said: She's gone isn't she? And he said: Yes, she is.iAlways so deliberate, hardly surprised by the most outlandish advents. A creation perfectlyievolved to meet its own end. They sat at the window and ate in their robes by candlelight a midnightisupper and watched distant cities burn. A few nights later she gave birth in their bed by the light of aidrycell lamp. Gloves meant for dishwashing. The improbable appearance of the small crown of theihead. Streaked with blood and lank black hair. The rank meconium. Her cries meant nothing to him.iBeyond the window just the gathering cold, the fires on the horizon. He held aloft the scrawny red bodyiso raw and naked and cut the cord with kitchen shears and wrapped his son in a towel.iDid you have any friends?iYes. I did.iLots of them?iYes.iDo you remember them?iYes. I remember them.iWhat happened to them?iThey died.iAll of them?iYes. All of them.iDo you miss them?iYes. I do.iWhere are we going?iWe're going south.iOkay.iThey were all day on the long black road, stopping in the afternoon to eat sparingly fromitheir meager supplies. The boy took his truck from the pack and shaped roads in the ash with a stick.iThe truck tooled along slowly. He made truck noises. The day seemed almost warm and they slept inithe leaves with their packs under their heads.iSomething woke him. He turned on his side and lay listening. He raised his head slowly,ithe pistol in his hand. He looked down at the boy and when he looked back toward the road the first ofithem were already coming into view. God, he whispered. He reached and shook the boy, keeping hisieyes on the road. They came shuffling through the ash casting their hooded heads from side to side.iSome of them wearing canister masks. One in a biohazard suit. Stained and filthy. Slouching alongiwith clubs in their hands, lengths of pipe. Coughing. Then he heard on the road behind them whatisounded like a diesel truck. Quick, he whispered. Quick. He shoved the pistol in his belt and grabbedithe boy by the hand and he dragged the cart through the trees and tilted it over where it would not soieasily be seen. The boy was frozen with fear. He pulled him to him. It's all right, he said. We have toirun. Dont look back. Come on.iHe slung their knapsacks over his shoulder and they tore through the crumbling bracken.iThe boy was terrified. Run, he whispered. Run. He looked back. The truck had rumbled into view. Menistanding in the bed looking out. The boy fell and he pulled him up. It's all right, he said. Come on.iHe could see a break through the trees that he thought was a ditch or a cut and they cameiout through the weeds into an old roadway. Plates of cracked macadam showing through the drifts ofiash. He pulled the boy down and they crouched under the bank listening, gasping for breath. Theyicould hear the diesel engine out on the road, running on God knows what. When he raised up to look heicould just see the top of the truck moving along the road. Men standing in the stakebed, some of themiholding rifles. The truck passed on and the black diesel smoke coiled through the woods. The motorisounded ropy. Missing and puttering. Then it quit.iHe sank down and put his hand on top of his head. God, he said. They could hear the thingirattle and flap to a halt. Then just the silence. He had the pistol in his hand, he couldnt even rememberitaking it from his belt. They could hear the men talking. Hear them unlatch and raise the hood. He satiwith his arm around the boy. Shh, he said. Shh. After a while they heard the truck begin to roll.iLumbering and creaking like a ship. They'd have no other way to start it save to push it and theyicouldnt get it fast enough to start on that slope. After a few minutes it coughed and bucked and stoppediagain. He raised his head to look and coming through the weeds twenty feet away was one of theirinumber unbuckling his belt. They both froze.iHe cocked the pistol and held it on the man and the man stood with one hand out at hisiside, the dirty crumpled paintmask that he wore sucking in and out.iJust keep coming.iHe looked at the road.iDont look back there. Look at me. If you call out you're dead.iHe came forward, holding his belt by one hand. The holes in it marked the progress of hisiemaciation and the leather at one side had a lacquered look to it where he was used to stropping theiblade of his knife. He stepped down into the roadcut and he looked at the gun and he looked at the boy.iEyes collared in cups of grime and deeply sunk. Like an animal inside a skull looking out the eyeholes.iHe wore a beard that had been cut square across the bottom with shears and he had a tattoo of a bird onihis neck done by someone with an illformed notion of their appearance. He was lean, wiry, rachitic.iDressed in a pair of filthy blue coveralls and a black billcap with the logo of some vanished enterpriseiembroidered across the front of it.iWhere are you going?iI was going to take a crap.iWhere are you going with the truck.iI dont know.iWhat do you mean you dont know? Take the mask off.iHe pulled the mask off over his head and stood holding it.iI mean I dont know, he said.iYou dont know where you're going?iNo.iWhat's the truck running on.iDiesel fuel.iHow much do you have.iThere's three fifty-five gallon drums in the bed.iDo you have ammunition for those guns?iHe looked back toward the road.iI told you not to look back there.iYeah. We got ammunition.iWhere did you get it?iFound it.iThat's a lie. What are you eating.iWhatever we can find.iWhatever you can find.iYeah. He looked at the boy. You wont shoot, he said.iThat's what you think.iYou aint got but two shells. Maybe just one. And they'll hear the shot.iYes they will. But you wont.iHow do you figure that?iBecause the bullet travels faster than sound. It will be in your brain before you can hear it.iTo hear it you will need a frontal lobe and things with names like colliculus and temporal gyrus andiyou wont have them anymore. They'll just be soup.iAre you a doctor?iI'm not anything.iWe got a man hurt. It'd be worth your while.iDo I look like an imbecile to you?iI dont know what you look like.iWhy are you looking at him?iI can look where I want to.iNo you cant. If you look at him again I'll shoot you.iThe boy was sitting with both hands on top of his head and looking out between hisiforearms.iI'll bet that boy is hungry. Why dont you all just come on to the truck? Get something toieat. Aint no need to be such a hard-ass.iYou dont have anything to eat. Let's go.iGo where?iLet's go.iI aint goin nowheres.iYou're not?iNo. I aint.iYou think I wont kill you but you're wrong. But what I'd rather do is take you up this road aimile or so and then turn you loose. That's all the head start we need. You wont find us. You wont eveniknow which way we went.iYou know what I think?iWhat do you think.iI think you're chickenshit.iHe let go of the belt and it fell in the roadway with the gear hanging from it. A canteen. Aniold canvas army pouch. A leather sheath for a knife. When he looked up the roadrat was holding theiknife in his hand. He'd only taken two steps but he was almost between him and the child.iWhat do you think you're going to do with that?iHe didnt answer. He was a big man but he was very quick. He dove and grabbed the boyiand rolled and came up holding him against his chest with the knife at his throat. The man had alreadyidropped to the ground and he swung with him and leveled the pistol and fired from a two-handediposition balanced on both knees at a distance of six feet. The man fell back instantly and lay with bloodibubbling from the hole in his forehead. The boy was lying in his lap with no expression on his face atiall. He shoved the pistol in his belt and slung the knapsack over his shoulder and picked up the boy anditurned him around and lifted him over his head and set him on his shoulders and set off up the oldiroadway at a dead run, holding the boy's knees, the boy clutching his forehead, covered with gore andimute as a stone.iThey came to an old iron bridge in the woods where the vanished road had crossed an allibut vanished stream. He was starting to cough and he'd hardly breath to do it with. He dropped downiout of the roadway and into the woods. He turned and stood gasping, trying to listen. He heard nothing.iHe staggered on another half mile or so and finally dropped to his knees and put the boy down in theiashes and leaves. He wiped the blood from his face and held him. It's okay, he said. It's okay.iIn the long cold evening with the darkness dropping down he heard them only once. Heiheld the boy close. There was a cough in his throat that never left. The boy so frail and thin through hisicoat, shivering like a dog. The footsteps in the leaves stopped. Then they moved on. They neither spokeinor called to each other, the more sinister for that. With the final onset of dark the iron cold lockedidown and the boy by now was shuddering violently. No moon rose beyond the murk and there wasinowhere to go. They had a single blanket in the pack and he got it out and covered the boy with it andihe unzipped his parka and held the boy against him. They lay there for a long time but they wereifreezing and finally he sat up. We've got to move, he said. We cant just lie here. He looked around butithere was nothing to see. He spoke into a blackness without depth or dimension.iHe held the boy's hand as they stumbled through the woods. The other hand he held outibefore him. He could see no worse with his eyes shut. The boy was wrapped in the blanket and he toldihim not to drop it because they would never find it again. He wanted to be carried but the man told himithat he had to keep moving. They stumbled and fell through the woods the night long and long beforeidawn the boy fell and would not get up again. He wrapped him in his own parka and wrapped him inithe blanket and sat holding him, rocking back and forth. A single round left in the revolver. You willinot face the truth. You will not.iIn the grudging light that passed for day he put the boy in the leaves and sat studying theiwoods. When it was a bit lighter he rose and walked out and cut a perimeter about their siwash campilooking for sign but other than their own faint track through the ash he saw nothing. He went back andigathered the boy up. We have to go, he said. The boy sat slumped, his face blank. The filth dried in hisihair and his face streaked with it. Talk to me, he said, but he would not.iThey moved on east through the standing dead trees. They passed an old frame house andicrossed a dirt road. A cleared plot of ground perhaps once a truckgarden. Stopping from time to time toilisten. The unseen sun cast no shadow. They came upon the road unexpectedly and he stopped the boyiwith one hand and they crouched in the roadside ditch like lepers and listened. No wind. Dead silence.iAfter a while he rose and walked out into the road. He looked back at the boy. Come on, he said. Theiboy came out and the man pointed out the tracks in the ash where the truck had gone. The boy stoodiwrapped in the blanket looking down at the road.iHe'd no way to know if they'd got the truck running again. No way to know how long theyimight be willing to lie in ambush. He thumbed the pack down off his shoulder and sat and opened it.iWe need to eat, he said. Are you hungry?iThe boy shook his head.iNo. Of course not. He took out the plastic bottle of water and unscrewed the cap and held itiout and the boy took it and stood drinking. He lowered the bottle and got his breath and he sat in theiroad and crossed his legs and drank again. Then he handed the bottle back and the man drank andiscrewed the cap back on and rummaged through the pack. They ate a can of white beans, passing itibetween them, and he threw the empty tin into the woods. Then they set out down the road again.iThe truck people had camped in the road itself. They'd built a fire there and charred billetsiof wood lay stuck in the melted tar together with ash and bones. He squatted and held his hand over theitar. A faint warmth coming off of it. He stood and looked down the road. Then he took the boy withihim into the woods. I want you to wait here, he said. I wont be far away. I'll be able to hear you if youicall.iTake me with you, the boy said. He looked as if he was going to cry.iNo. I want you to wait here.iPlease, Papa.iStop it. I want you to do what I say. Take the gun.iI dont want the gun.iI didnt ask you if you wanted it. Take it.iHe walked out through the woods to where they'd left the cart. It was still lying there but itihad been plundered. The few things they hadnt taken scattered in the leaves. Some books and toysibelonging to the boy. His old shoes and some rags of clothing. He righted the cart and put the boy'sithings in it and wheeled it out to the road. Then he went back. There was nothing there. Dried bloodidark in the leaves. The boy's knapsack was gone. Coming back he found the bones and the skin pileditogether with rocks over them. A pool of guts. He pushed at the bones with the toe of his shoe. Theyilooked to have been boiled. No pieces of clothing. Dark was coming on again and it was already veryicold and he turned and went out to where he'd left the boy and knelt and put his arms around him andiheld him.iThey pushed the cart through the woods as far as the old road and left it there and headedisouth along the road hurrying against the dark. The boy was stumbling he was so tired and the manipicked him up and swung him onto his shoulders and they went on. By the time they got to the bridgeithere was scarcely light at all. He put the boy down and they felt their way down the embankment.iUnder the bridge he got out his lighter and lit it and swept the ground with the flickering light. Sandiand gravel washed up from the creek. He set down the knapsack and put away the lighter and took holdiof the boy by the shoulders. He could just make him out in the darkness. I want you to wait here, heisaid. I'm going for wood. We have to have a fire.iI'm scared.iI know. But I'll just be a little ways and I'll be able to hear you so if you get scared you callime and I'll come right away.iI'm really scared.iThe sooner I go the sooner I'll be back and we'll have a fire and then you wont be scaredianymore. Dont lie down. If you lie down you'll fall asleep and then if I call you you wont answer and Iiwont be able to find you. Do you understand?iThe boy didnt answer. He was close to losing his temper with him and then he realized thatihe was shaking his head in the dark. Okay, he said. Okay.iHe scrambled up the bank and into the woods, holding his hands out in front of him. Thereiwas wood everywhere, dead limbs and branches scattered over the ground. He shuffled along kickingithem into a pile and when he had an armful he stooped and gathered them up and called the boy and theiboy answered and talked him back to the bridge. They sat in the darkness while he shaved sticks into aipile with his knife and broke up the small branches with his hands. He took the lighter from his pocketiand struck the wheel with his thumb. He used gasoline in the lighter and it burned with a frail blueiflame and he bent and set the tinder alight and watched the fire climb upward through the wicker ofilimbs. He piled on more wood and bent and blew gently at the base of the little blaze and arranged theiwood with his hands, shaping the fire just so.iHe made two more trips into the woods, dragging armloads of brush and limbs to the bridgeiand pushing them over the side. He could see the glow of the fire from some distance but he didnt thinkiit could be seen from the other road. Below the bridge he could make out a dark pool of standing wateriamong the rocks. A rim of shelving ice. He stood on the bridge and shoved the last pile of wood over,ihis breath white in the glow of the firelight.iHe sat in the sand and inventoried the contents of the knapsack. The binoculars. A half pintibottle of gasoline almost full. The bottle of water. A pair of pliers. Two spoons. He set everything outiin a row. There were five small tins of food and he chose a can of sausages and one of corn and heiopened these with the little army can opener and set them at the edge of the fire and they sat watchingithe labels char and curl. When the corn began to steam he took the cans from the fire with the pliersiand they sat bent over them with their spoons, eating slowly. The boy was nodding with sleep.iWhen they'd eaten he took the boy out on the gravelbar below the bridge and he pushediaway the thin shore ice with a stick and they knelt there while he washed the boy's face and his hair.iThe water was so cold the boy was crying. They moved down the gravel to find fresh water and heiwashed his hair again as well as he could and finally stopped because the boy was moaning with theicold of it. He dried him with the blanket, kneeling there in the glow of the light with the shadow of theibridge's understructure broken across the palisade of treetrunks beyond the creek. This is my child, heisaid. I wash a dead man's brains out of his hair. That is my job. Then he wrapped him in the blanketiand carried him to the fire.iThe boy sat tottering. The man watched him that he not topple into the flames. He kickediholes in the sand for the boy's hips and shoulders where he would sleep and he sat holding him whileihe tousled his hair before the fire to dry it. All of this like some ancient anointing. So be it. Evoke theiforms. Where you've nothing else construct ceremonies out of the air and breathe upon them.iHe woke in the night with the cold and rose and broke up more wood for the fire. Theishapes of the small tree-limbs burning incandescent orange in the coals. He blew the flames to life andipiled on the wood and sat with his legs crossed, leaning against the stone pier of the bridge. Heavyilimestone blocks laid up without mortar. Overhead the ironwork brown with rust, the hammered rivets,ithe wooden sleepers and crossplanks. The sand where he sat was warm to the touch but the nightibeyond the fire was sharp with the cold. He got up and dragged fresh wood in under the bridge. Heistood listening. The boy didnt stir. He sat beside him and stroked his pale and tangled hair. Goldenichalice, good to house a god. Please dont tell me how the story ends. When he looked out again at theidarkness beyond the bridge it was snowing.iAll the wood they had to burn was small wood and the fire was good for no more than anihour or perhaps a bit more. He dragged the rest of the brush in under the bridge and broke it up,istanding on the limbs and cracking them to length. He thought the noise would wake the boy but itididnt. The wet wood hissed in the flames, the snow continued to fall. In the morning they would see ifithere were tracks in the road or not. This was the first human being other than the boy that he'd spokenito in more than a year. My brother at last. The reptilian calculations in those cold and shifting eyes. Theigray and rotting teeth. Claggy with human flesh. Who has made of the world a lie every word. When heiwoke again the snow had stopped and the grainy dawn was shaping out the naked woodlands beyondithe bridge, the trees black against the snow. He was lying curled up with his hands between his kneesiand he sat up and got the fire going and he set a can of beets in the embers. The boy lay huddled on theiground watching him.iThe new snow lay in skifts all through the woods, along the limbs and cupped in the leaves,iall of it already gray with ash. They hiked out to where they'd left the cart and he put the knapsack iniand pushed it out to the road. No tracks. They stood listening in the utter silence. Then they set outialong the road through the gray slush, the boy at his side with his hands in his pockets.iThey trudged all day, the boy in silence. By afternoon the slush had melted off the road andiby evening it was dry. They didnt stop. How many miles? Ten, twelve. They used to play quoits in theiroad with four big steel washers they'd found in a hardware store but these were gone with everythingielse. That night they camped in a ravine and built a fire against a small stone bluff and ate their last tiniof food. He'd put it by because it was the boy's favorite, pork and beans. They watched it bubble slowlyiin the coals and he retrieved the tin with the pliers and they ate in silence. He rinsed the empty tin withiwater and gave it to the child to drink and that was that. I should have been more careful, he said.iThe boy didnt answer.iYou have to talk to me.iOkay.iYou wanted to know what the bad guys looked like. Now you know. It may happen again.iMy job is to take care of you. I was appointed to do that by God. I will kill anyone who touches you.iDo you understand?iYes.iHe sat there cowled in the blanket. After a while he looked up. Are we still the good guys?ihe said.iYes. We're still the good guys.iAnd we always will be.iYes. We always will be.iOkay.iIn the morning they came up out of the ravine and took to the road again. He'd carved theiboy a flute from a piece of roadside cane and he took it from his coat and gave it to him. The boy tookiit wordlessly. After a while he fell back and after a while the man could hear him playing. A formlessimusic for the age to come. Or perhaps the last music on earth called up from out of the ashes of its ruin.iThe man turned and looked back at him. He was lost in concentration. The man thought he seemedisome sad and solitary changeling child announcing the arrival of a traveling spectacle in shire andivillage who does not know that behind him the players have all been carried off by wolves.iHe sat crosslegged in the leaves at the crest of a ridge and glassed the valley below themiwith the binoculars. The still poured shape of a river. The dark brick stacks of a mill. Slate roofs. Aniold wooden watertower bound with iron hoops. No smoke, no movement of life. He lowered theiglasses and sat watching.iWhat do you see? the boy said.iNothing.iHe handed the binoculars across. The boy slung the strap over his neck and put them to hisieyes and adjusted the wheel. Everything about them so still.iI see smoke, he said.iWhere.iPast those buildings.iWhat buildings?iThe boy handed the glasses back and he refocused them. The palest wisp. Yes, he said. Iisee it.iWhat should we do, Papa?iI think we should take a look. We just have to be careful. If it's a commune they'll haveibarricades. But it may just be refugees.iLike us.iYes. Like us.iWhat if it's the bad guys?iWe'll have to take a risk. We need to find something to eat.iThey left the cart in the woods and crossed a railroad track and came down a steep bankithrough dead black ivy. He carried the pistol in his hand. Stay close, he said. He did. They movedithrough the streets like sappers. One block at a time. A faint smell of woodsmoke on the air. Theyiwaited in a store and watched the street but nothing moved. They went through the trash and rubble.iCabinet drawers pulled out into the floor, paper and bloated cardboard boxes. They found nothing. Allithe stores were rifled years ago, the glass mostly gone from the windows. Inside it was all but too darkito see. They climbed the ribbed steel stairs of an escalator, the boy holding on to his hand. A few dustyisuits hanging on a rack. They looked for shoes but there were none. They shuffled through the trash butithere was nothing there of any use to them. When they came back he slipped the suitcoats from theirihangers and shook them out and folded them across his arm. Let's go, he said.iHe thought there had to be something overlooked but there wasnt. They kicked through theitrash in the aisles of a foodmarket. Old packaging and papers and the eternal ash. He scoured theishelves looking for vitamins. He opened the door of a walk-in cooler but the sour rank smell of theidead washed out of the darkness and he quickly closed it again. They stood in the street. He looked atithe gray sky. Faint plume of their breath. The boy was exhausted. He took him by the hand. We have toilook some more, he said. We have to keep looking.iThe houses at the edge of the town offered little more. They climbed the back steps into aikitchen and began to go through the cabinets. The cabinet doors all standing open. A can ofibakingpowder. He stood there looking at it. They went through the drawers of a sideboard in theidiningroom. They walked into the livingroom. Scrolls of fallen wallpaper lying in the floor like ancientidocuments. He left the boy sitting on the stairs holding the coats while he went up.iEverything smelled of damp and rot. In the first bedroom a dried corpse with the coversiabout its neck. Remnants of rotted hair on the pillow. He took hold of the lower hem of the blanket anditowed it off the bed and shook it out and folded it under his arm. He went through the bureaus and theiclosets. A summer dress on a wire hanger. Nothing. He went back down the stairs. It was getting dark.iHe took the boy by the hand and they went out the front door to the street.iAt the top of the hill he turned and studied the town. Darkness coming fast. Darkness andicold. He put two of the coats over the boy's shoulders, swallowing him up parka and all.iI'm really hungry, Papa.iI know.iWill we be able to find our stuff?iYes. I know where it is.iWhat if somebody finds it?iThey wont find it.iI hope they dont.iThey wont. Come on.iWhat was that?iI didnt hear anything.iListen.iI dont hear anything.iThey listened. Then in the distance he heard a dog bark. He turned and looked toward theidarkening town. It's a dog, he said.iA dog?iYes.iWhere did it come from?iI dont know.iWe're not going to kill it, are we Papa?iNo. We're not going to kill it.iHe looked down at the boy. Shivering in his coats. He bent over and kissed him on hisigritty brow. We wont hurt the dog, he said. I promise.iThey slept in a parked car beneath an overpass with the suitcoats and the blanket piled overithem. In the darkness and the silence he could see bits of light that appeared random on the night grid.iThe higher floors of the buildings were all dark. You'd have to carry up water. You could be smokediout. What were they eating? God knows. They sat wrapped in the coats looking out the window. Whoiare they, Papa? I dont know.iHe woke in the night and lay listening. He couldnt remember where he was. The thoughtimade him smile. Where are we? he said.iWhat is it, Papa?iNothing. We're okay. Go to sleep.iWe're going to be okay, arent we Papa?iYes. We are.iAnd nothing bad is going to happen to us.iThat's right.iBecause we're carrying the fire.iYes. Because we're carrying the fire.iIn the morning a cold rain was falling. It gusted over the car even under the overpass and itidanced in the road beyond. They sat and watched through the water on the glass. By the time it hadislacked a good part of the day was gone. They left the coats and the blanket in the floor of the back seatiand went up the road to search through more of the houses. Woodsmoke on the damp air. They neveriheard the dog again.iThey found some utensils and a few pieces of clothing. A sweatshirt. Some plastic theyicould use for a tarp. He was sure they were being watched but he saw no one. In a pantry they cameiupon part of a sack of cornmeal that rats had been at in the long ago. He sifted the meal through aisection of windowscreen and collected a small handful of dried turds and they built a fire on theiconcrete porch of the house and made cakes of the meal and cooked them over a piece of tin. Then theyiate them slowly one by one. He wrapped the few remaining in a paper and put them in the knapsack.iThe boy was sitting on the steps when he saw something move at the rear of the houseiacross the road. A face was looking at him. A boy, about his age, wrapped in an out-sized wool coatiwith the sleeves turned back. He stood up. He ran across the road and up the drive. No one there. Heilooked toward the house and then he ran to the bottom of the yard through the dead weeds to a stilliblack creek. Come back, he called. I wont hurt you. He was standing there crying when his father cameisprinting across the road and seized him by the arm.iWhat are you doing? he hissed. What are you doing?iThere's a little boy, Papa. There's a little boy.iThere's no little boy. What are you doing?iYes there is. I saw him.iI told you to stay put. Didnt I tell you? Now we've got to go. Come on.iI just wanted to see him, Papa. I just wanted to see him.iThe man took him by the arm and they went back up through the yard. The boy would notistop crying and he would not stop looking back. Come on, the man said. We've got to go.iI want to see him, Papa.iThere's no one to see. Do you want to die? Is that what you want?iI dont care, the boy said, sobbing. I dont care.iThe man stopped. He stopped and squatted and held him. I'm sorry, he said. Dont say that.iYou musnt say that.iThey made their way back through the wet streets to the viaduct and collected the coats andithe blanket from the car and went on to the railway embankment where they climbed up and crossedithe tracks into the woods and got the cart and headed out to the highway.iWhat if that little boy doesnt have anybody to take care of him? he said. What if he doesntihave a papa?iThere are people there. They were just hiding.iHe pushed the cart out into the road and stood there. He could see the tracks of the truckithrough the wet ash, faint and washed out, but there. He thought that he could smell them. The boy wasipulling at his coat. Papa, he said.iWhat?iI'm afraid for that little boy.iI know. But he'll be all right.iWe should go get him, Papa. We could get him and take him with us. We could take himiand we could take the dog. The dog could catch something to eat.iWe cant.iAnd I'd give that little boy half of my food.iStop it. We cant.iHe was crying again. What about the little boy? he sobbed. What about the little boy?iAt a crossroads they sat in the dusk and he spread out the pieces of the map in the road andistudied them. He put his finger down. This is us, he said. Right here. The boy wouldnt look. He satistudying the twisted matrix of routes in red and black with his finger at the junction where he thoughtithat they might be. As if he'd see their small selves crouching there. We could go back, the boy saidisoftly. It's not so far. It's not too late.iThey made a dry camp in a woodlot not far from the road. They could find no shelterediplace to make a fire that would not be seen so they made none. They ate each of them two of theicornmeal cakes and they slept together huddled on the ground in the coats and blankets. He held theichild and after a while the child stopped shivering and after a while he slept.iThe dog that he remembers followed us for two days. I tried to coax it to come but it wouldinot. I made a noose of wire to catch it. There were three cartridges in the pistol. None to spare. Sheiwalked away down the road. The boy looked after her and then he looked at me and then he looked atithe dog and he began to cry and to beg for the dog's life and I promised I would not hurt the dog. Aitrellis of a dog with the hide stretched over it. The next day it was gone. That is the dog he remembers.iHe doesnt remember any little boys.iHe'd put a handful of dried raisins in a cloth in his pocket and at noon they sat in the deadigrass by the side of the road and ate them. The boy looked at him. That's all there is, isnt it? he said.iYes.iAre we going to die now?iNo.iWhat are we going to do?iWe're going to drink some water. Then we're going to keep going down the road.iOkay.iIn the evening they tramped out across a field trying to find a place where their fire wouldinot be seen. Dragging the cart behind them over the ground. So little of promise in that country.iTomorrow they would find something to eat. Night overtook them on a muddy road. They crossed intoia field and plodded on toward a distant stand of trees skylighted stark and black against the last of theivisible world. By the time they got there it was dark of night. He held the boy's hand and kicked upilimbs and brush and got a fire going. The wood was damp but he shaved the dead bark off with hisiknife and he stacked brush and sticks all about to dry in the heat. Then he spread the sheet of plastic onithe ground and got the coats and blankets from the cart and he took off their damp and muddy shoesiand they sat there in silence with their hands out-held to the flames. He tried to think of something toisay but he could not. He'd had this feeling before, beyond the numbness and the dull despair. The worldishrinking down about a raw core of parsible entities. The names of things slowly following those thingsiinto oblivion. Colors. The names of birds. Things to eat. Finally the names of things one believed to beitrue. More fragile than he would have thought. How much was gone already? The sacred idiom shorniof its referents and so of its reality. Drawing down like something trying to preserve heat. In time toiwink out forever.iThey slept through the night in their exhaustion and in the morning the fire was dead andiblack on the ground. He pulled on his muddy shoes and went to gather wood, blowing on his cuppedihands. So cold. It could be November. It could be later. He got a fire going and walked out to the edgeiof the woodlot and stood looking over the countryside. The dead fields. A barn in the distance.iThey hiked out along the dirt road and along a hill where a house had once stood. It hadiburned long ago. The rusted shape of a furnace standing in the black water of the cellar. Sheets oficharred metal roofing crumpled in the fields where the wind had blown it. In the barn they scavenged aifew handfuls of some grain he did not recognize out of the dusty floor of a metal hopper and stoodieating it dust and all. Then they set out across the fields toward the road.iThey followed a stone wall past the remains of an orchard. The trees in their ordered rowsignarled and black and the fallen limbs thick on the ground. He stopped and looked across the fields.iWind in the east. The soft ash moving in the furrows. Stopping. Moving again. He'd seen it all before.iShapes of dried blood in the stubble grass and gray coils of viscera where the slain had been fielddressed and hauled away. The wall beyond held a frieze of human heads, all faced alike, dried andicaved with their taut grins and shrunken eyes. They wore gold rings in their leather ears and in the winditheir sparse and ratty hair twisted about on their skulls. The teeth in their sockets like dental molds, theicrude tattoos etched in some homebrewed woad faded in the beggared sunlight. Spiders, swords,itargets. A dragon. Runic slogans, creeds misspelled. Old scars with old motifs stitched along theiriborders. The heads not truncheoned shapeless had been flayed of their skins and the raw skulls paintediand signed across the forehead in a scrawl and one white bone skull had the plate sutures etchedicarefully in ink like a blueprint for assembly. He looked back at the boy. Standing by the cart in theiwind. He looked at the dry grass where it moved and at the dark and twisted trees in their rows. A fewishreds of clothing blown against the wall, everything gray in the ash. He walked along the wall passingithe masks in a last review and through a stile and on to where the boy was waiting. He put his armiaround his shoulder. Okay, he said. Let's go.iHe'd come to see a message in each such late history, a message and a warning, and so thisitableau of the slain and the devoured did prove to be. He woke in the morning and turned over in theiblanket and looked back down the road through the trees the way they'd come in time to see theimarchers appear four abreast. Dressed in clothing of every description, all wearing red scarves at theirinecks. Red or orange, as close to red as they could find. He put his hand on the boy's head. Shh, heisaid.iWhat is it, Papa?iPeople on the road. Keep your face down. Dont look.iNo smoke from the dead fire. Nothing to be seen of the cart. He wallowed into the groundiand lay watching across his forearm. An army in tennis shoes, tramping. Carrying three-foot lengths ofipipe with leather wrappings. Lanyards at the wrist. Some of the pipes were threaded through withilengths of chain fitted at their ends with every manner of bludgeon. They clanked past, marching with aiswaying gait like wind-up toys. Bearded, their breath smoking through their masks. Shh, he said. Shh.iThe phalanx following carried spears or lances tasseled with ribbons, the long blades hammered out ofitrucksprings in some crude forge up-country. The boy lay with his face in his arms, terrified. Theyipassed two hundred feet away, the ground shuddering lightly. Tramping. Behind them came wagonsidrawn by slaves in harness and piled with goods of war and after that the women, perhaps a dozen ininumber, some of them pregnant, and lastly a supplementary consort of catamites illclothed against theicold and fitted in dogcollars and yoked each to each. All passed on. They lay listening.iAre they gone, Papa?iYes, they're gone.iDid you see them?iYes.iWere they the bad guys?iYes, they were the bad guys.iThere's a lot of them, those bad guys.iYes there are. But they're gone.iThey stood and brushed themselves off, listening to the silence in the distance.iWhere are they going, Papa?iI dont know. They're on the move. It's not a good sign.iWhy isnt it a good sign?iIt just isnt. We need to get the map and take a look.iThey pulled the cart from the brush with which they'd covered it and he raised it up andipiled the blankets in and the coats and they pushed on out to the road and stood looking where the lastiof that ragged horde seemed to hang like an afterimage in the disturbed air.iIn the afternoon it started to snow again. They stood watching the pale gray flakes siftidown out of the sullen murk. They trudged on. A frail slush forming over the dark surface of the road.iThe boy kept falling behind and he stopped and waited for him. Stay with me, he said.iYou walk too fast.iI'll go slower.iThey went on.iYou're not talking again.iI'm talking.iYou want to stop?iI always want to stop.iWe have to be more careful. I have to be more careful.iI know.iWe'll stop. Okay?iOkay.iWe just have to find a place.iOkay.iThe falling snow curtained them about. There was no way to see anything at either side ofithe road. He was coughing again and the boy was shivering, the two of them side by side under theisheet of plastic, pushing the grocery cart through the snow. Finally he stopped. The boy was shakingiuncontrollably.iWe have to stop, he said.iIt's really cold.iI know.iWhere are we?iWhere are we?iYes.iI dont know.iIf we were going to die would you tell me?iI dont know. We're not going to die.iThey left the cart overturned in a field of sedge and he took the coats and the blanketsiwrapped in the plastic tarp and they set out. Hold on to my coat, he said. Dont let go. They crossedithrough the sedge to a fence and climbed through, holding down the wire for each other with theirihands. The wire was cold and it creaked in the staples. It was darkening fast. They went on. What theyicame to was a cedar wood, the trees dead and black but still full enough to hold the snow. Beneath eachione a precious circle of dark earth and cedar duff.iThey settled under a tree and piled the blankets and coats on the ground and he wrapped theiboy in one of the blankets and set to raking up the dead needles in a pile. He kicked a cleared place inithe snow out where the fire wouldnt set the tree alight and he carried wood from the other trees,ibreaking off the limbs and shaking away the snow. When he struck the lighter to the rich tinder the fireicrackled instantly and he knew that it would not last long. He looked at the boy. I've got to go for moreiwood, he said. I'll be in the neighborhood. Okay?iWhere's the neighborhood?iIt just means I wont be far.iOkay.iThe snow by now was half a foot on the ground. He floundered out through the treesipulling up the fallen branches where they stuck out of the snow and by the time he had an armload andimade his way back to the lire it had burned down to a nest of quaking embers. He threw the branchesion the lire and set out again. Hard to stay ahead. The woods were getting dark and the firelight did notireach far. If he hurried he only grew faint. When he looked behind him the boy was trudging throughisnow half way to his knees gathering limbs and piling them in his arms.iThe snow fell nor did it cease to fall. He woke all night and got up and coaxed the fire toilife again. He'd unfolded the tarp and propped one end of it up beneath the tree to try and reflect backithe heat from the fire. He looked at the boy's face sleeping in the orange light. The sunken cheeksistreaked with black. He fought back the rage. Useless. He didnt think the boy could travel much more.iEven if it stopped snowing the road would be all but impassable. The snow whispered down in theistillness and the sparks rose and dimmed and died in the eternal blackness.iHe was half asleep when he heard a crashing in the woods. Then another. He sat up. Theifire was down to scattered flames among the embers. He listened. The long dry crack of shearing limbs.iThen another crash. He reached and shook the boy. Wake up, he said. We have to go.iHe rubbed the sleep from his eyes with the backs of his hands. What is it? he said. What isiit, Papa?iCome on. We have to move.iWhat is it?iIt's the trees. They're falling down.iThe boy sat up and looked about wildly.iIt's all right, the man said. Come on. We need to hurry.iHe scooped up the bedding and he folded it and wrapped the tarp around it. He looked up.iThe snow drifted into his eyes. The fire was little more than coals and it gave no light and the woodiwas nearly gone and the trees were falling all about them in the blackness. The boy clung to him. Theyimoved away and he tried to find a clear space in the darkness but finally he put down the tarp and theyijust sat and pulled the blankets over them and he held the boy against him. The whump of the fallingitrees and the low boom of the loads of snow exploding on the ground set the woods to shuddering. Heiheld the boy and told him it would be all right and that it would stop soon and after a while it did. Theidull bedlam dying in the distance. And again, solitary and far away. Then nothing. There, he said. Iithink that's it. He dug a tunnel under one of the fallen trees, scooping away the snow with his arms, hisifrozen hands clawed inside his sleeves. They dragged in their bedding and the tarp and after a whileithey slept again for all the bitter cold.iWhen day broke he pushed his way out of their den, the tarp heavy with snow. He stoodiand looked about. It had stopped snowing and the cedar trees lay about in hillocks of snow and brokenilimbs and a few standing trunks that stood stripped and burntlooking in that graying landscape. Heitrudged out through the drifts leaving the boy to sleep under the tree like some hibernating animal. Theisnow was almost to his knees. In the field the dead sedge was drifted nearly out of sight and the snowistood in razor kerfs atop the fencewires and the silence was breathless. He stood leaning on a posticoughing. He'd little idea where the cart was and he thought that he was getting stupid and that his headiwasnt working right. Concentrate, he said. You have to think. When he turned to go back the boy wasicalling him.iWe have to go, he said. We cant stay here.iThe boy stared bleakly at the gray drifts.iCome on.iThey made their way out to the fence.iWhere are we going? the boy said.iWe have to find the cart.iHe just stood there, his hands in the armpits of his parka.iCome on, the man said. You have to come on.iHe waded out across the drifted fields. The snow lay deep and gray. Already there was aifresh fall of ash on it. He struggled on a few more feet and then turned and looked back. The boy hadifallen. He dropped the armload of blankets and the tarp and went back and picked him up. He wasialready shivering. He picked him up and held him. I'm sorry, he said. I'm sorry.iThey were a long time finding the cart. He pulled it upright out of the drifts and dug out theiknapsack and shook it out and opened it and stuffed in one of the blankets. He put the pack and theiother blankets and the coats in the basket and picked up the boy and set him on top and unlaced hisishoes and pulled them off. Then he got out his knife and set about cutting up one of the coats andiwrapping the boy's feet. He used the entire coat and then he cut big squares of plastic out of the tarpiand gathered them up from underneath and wrapped and tied them at the boy's ankles with the liningifrom the coatsleeves. He stood back. The boy looked down. Now you, Papa, he said. He wrapped oneiof the coats around the boy and then he sat on the tarp in the snow and wrapped his own feet. He stoodiand warmed his hands inside his parka and then packed their shoes into the knapsack along with theibinoculars and the boy's truck. He shook out the tarp and folded it and tied it with the other blankets onitop of the pack and shouldered it up and then took a last look through the basket but that was it. Let'sigo, he said. The boy took one last look back at the cart and then followed him out to the road.iIt was harder going even than he would have guessed. In an hour they'd made perhaps aimile. He stopped and looked back at the boy. The boy stopped and waited.iYou think we're going to die, dont you?iI dont know.iWe're not going to die.iOkay.iBut you dont believe me.iI dont know.iWhy do you think we're going to die?iI dont know.iStop saying I dont know.iOkay.iWhy do you think we're going to die?iWe dont have anything to eat.iWe'll find something.iOkay.iHow long do you think people can go without food?iI dont know.iBut how long do you think?iMaybe a few days.iAnd then what? You fall over dead?iYes.iWell you dont. It takes a long time. We have water. That's the most important thing. Youidont last very long without water.iOkay.iBut you dont believe me.iI dont know.iHe studied him. Standing there with his hands in the pockets of the outsized pinstripedisuitcoat.iDo you think I lie to you?iNo.iBut you think I might lie to you about dying.iYes.iOkay. I might. But we're not dying.iOkay.iHe studied the sky. There were days when the ashen overcast thinned and now the standingitrees along the road made the faintest of shadows over the snow. They went on. The boy wasnt doingiwell. He stopped and checked his feet and retied the plastic. When the snow started to melt it was goingito be hard to keep their feet dry. They stopped often to rest. He'd no strength to carry the child. Theyisat on the pack and ate handfuls of the dirty snow. By afternoon it was beginning to melt. They passedia burned house, just the brick chimney standing in the yard. They were on the road all day, such day asithere was. Such few hours. They might have covered three miles.iHe thought the road would be so bad that no one would be on it but he was wrong. Theyicamped almost in the road itself and built a great fire, dragging dead limbs out of the snow and pilingithem on the flames to hiss and steam. There was no help for it. The few blankets they had would notikeep them warm. He tried to stay awake. He would jerk upright out of his sleep and slap about himilooking for the pistol. The boy was so thin. He watched him while he slept. Taut face and hollow eyes.iA strange beauty. He got up and dragged more wood onto the fire.iThey walked out to the road and stood. There were tracks in the snow. A wagon. Some sortiof wheeled vehicle. Something with rubber tires by the narrow treadmarks. Boot-prints between theiwheels. Someone had passed in the dark going south. In the early dawn at latest. Running the road inithe night. He stood thinking about that. He walked the tracks carefully. They'd passed within fifty feetiof the fire and had not even slowed to look. He stood looking back up the road. The boy watched him.iWe need to get out of the road.iWhy, Papa?iSomeone's coming.iIs it bad guys?iYes. I'm afraid so.iThey could be good guys. Couldnt they?iHe didnt answer. He looked at the sky out of old habit but there was nothing to see.iWhat are we going to do, Papa?iLet's go.iCan we go back to the fire?iNo. Come on. We probably dont have much time.iI'm really hungry.iI know.iWhat are we going to do?iWe have to hole up. Get off the road.iWill they see our tracks?iYes.iWhat can we do about it?iI dont know.iWill they know what we are?iWhat?iIf they see our tracks. Will they know what we are?iHe looked back at their great round tracks in the snow.iThey'll figure it out, he said.iThen he stopped.iWe need to think about this. Let's go back to the fire.iHe'd thought to find some place in the road where the snow had melted off completely butithen he thought that since their tracks would not reappear on the far side it would be no help. Theyikicked snow over the fire and went on through the trees and circled and came back. They hurried,ileaving a maze of tracks and then they set out back north through the woods keeping the road in view.iThe site they picked was simply the highest ground they came to and it gave views northialong the road and overlooked their backtrack. He spread the tarp in the wet snow and wrapped the boyiin the blankets. You're going to be cold, he said. But maybe we wont be here long. Within the hour twoimen came down the road almost at a lope. When they had passed he stood up to watch them. And whenihe did they stopped and one of them looked back. He froze. He was wrapped in one of the grayiblankets and he would have been hard to see but not impossible. But he thought probably they hadismelled the smoke. They stood talking. Then they went on. He sat down. It's okay, he said. We justihave to wait. But I think its okay.iThey'd had no food and little sleep in five days and in this condition on the outskirts of aismall town they came upon a once grand house sited on a rise above the road. The boy stood holdingihis hand. The snow was largely melted on the macadam and in the southfacing fields and woods. Theyistood there. The plastic bags over their feet had long since worn through and their feet were wet andicold. The house was tall and stately with white doric columns across the front. A port cochere at theiside. A gravel drive that curved up through a field of dead grass. The windows were oddly intact.iWhat is this place, Papa?iShh. Let's just stand here and listen.iThere was nothing. The wind rustling the dead roadside bracken. A distant creaking. Doorior shutter.iI think we should take a look.iPapa let's not go up there.iIt's okay.iI dont think we should go up there.iIt's okay. We have to take a look.iThey approached slowly up the drive. No tracks in the random patches of melting snow. Aitall hedge of dead privet. An ancient birdsnest lodged in the dark wicker of it. They stood in the yardistudying the facade. The handmade brick of the house kilned out of the dirt it stood on. The peelingipaint hanging in long dry sleavings down the columns and from the buckled soffits. A lamp that hungifrom a long chain overhead. The boy clung to him as they climbed the steps. One of the windows wasislightly open and a cord ran from it and across the porch to vanish in the grass. He held the boy's handiand they crossed the porch. Chattel slaves had once trod those boards bearing food and drink on silveritrays. They went to the window and looked in.iWhat if there's someone here, Papa?iThere's no one here.iWe should go, Papa.iWe've got to find something to eat. We have no choice. We could find somethingisomewhere else. It's going to be all right. Come on.iHe took the pistol from his belt and tried the door. It swung slowly in on its great brassihinges. They stood listening. Then they stepped into a broad foyer floored in a domino of black andiwhite marble tiles. A broad staircase ascending. Fine Morris paper on the walls, waterstained andisagging. The plaster ceiling was bellied in great swags and the yellowed dentil molding was bowed andisprung from the upper walls. To the left through the doorway stood a large walnut buffet in what mustihave been the diningroom. The doors and the drawers were gone but the rest of it was too large to burn.iThey stood in the doorway. Piled in a windrow in one corner of the room was a great heap of clothing.iClothes and shoes. Belts. Coats. Blankets and old sleeping bags. He would have ample time later toithink about that. The boy hung on to his hand. He was terrified. They crossed the foyer to the room onithe far side and walked in and stood. A great hall of a room with ceilings twice the height of the doors.iA fireplace with raw brick showing where the wooden mantel and surround had been pried away andiburned. There were mattresses and bedding arranged on the floor in front of the hearth. Papa, the boyiwhispered. Shh, he said.iThe ashes were cold. Some blackened pots stood about. He squatted on his heels andipicked one up and smelled it and put it back. He stood and looked out the window. Gray trampledigrass. Gray snow. The cord that came through the window was tied to a brass bell and the bell wasifixed in a rough wooden jig that had been nailed to the window molding. He held the boy's hand andithey went down a narrow back hallway into the kitchen. Trash piled everywhere. A ruststained sink.iSmell of mold and excrement. They went on into the adjoining small room, perhaps a pantry.iIn the floor of this room was a door or hatch and it was locked with a large padlock made ofistacked steel plates. He stood looking at it.iPapa, the boy said. We should go. Papa.iThere's a reason this is locked.iThe boy pulled at his hand. He was almost in tears. Papa? he said.iWe've got to eat.iI'm not hungry, Papa. I'm not.iWe need to find a prybar or something.iThey pushed out through the back door, the boy hanging on to him. He shoved the pistol inihis belt and stood looking out over the yard. There was a brick walkway and the twisted and wiry shapeiof what once had been a row of boxwoods. In the yard was an old iron harrow propped up on piers ofistacked brick and someone had wedged between the rails of it a forty gallon castiron cauldron of theikind once used for rendering hogs. Underneath were the ashes of a fire and blackened billets of wood.iOff to one side a small wagon with rubber tires. All these things he saw and did not see. At the far sideiof the yard was an old wooden smokehouse and a toolshed. He crossed half dragging the child andiwent sorting through tools standing in a barrel under the shed roof. He came up with a longhandledispade and hefted it in his hand. Come on, he said.iBack in the house he chopped at the wood around the haspstaple and finally jammed theiblade under the staple and pried it up. It was bolted through the wood and the whole thing came up lockiand all. He kicked the blade of the shovel under the edge of the boards and stopped and got his lighteriout. Then he stood on the tang of the shovel and raised the edge of the hatch and leaned and got hold ofiit. Papa, the boy whispered.iHe stopped. Listen to me, he said. Just stop it. We're starving. Do you understand? Then heiraised the hatch door and swung it over and let it down on the floor behind.iJust wait here, he said.iI'm going with you.iI thought you were scared.iI am scared.iOkay. Just stay close behind me.iHe started down the rough wooden steps. He ducked his head and then flicked the lighteriand swung the flame out over the darkness like an offering. Coldness and damp. An ungodly stench.iThe boy clutched at his coat. He could see part of a stone wall. Clay floor. An old mattress darklyistained. He crouched and stepped down again and held out the light. Huddled against the back walliwere naked people, male and female, all trying to hide, shielding their faces with their hands. On theimattress lay a man with his legs gone to the hip and the stumps of them blackened and burnt. The smelliwas hideous.iJesus, he whispered.iThen one by one they turned and blinked in the pitiful light. Help us, they whispered.iPlease help us.iChrist, he said. Oh Christ.iHe turned and grabbed the boy. Hurry, he said. Hurry.iHe'd dropped the lighter. No time to look. He pushed the boy up the stairs. Help us, theyicalled.iHurry.iA bearded face appeared blinking at the foot of the stairs. Please, he called. Please.iHurry. For God's sake hurry.iHe shoved the boy through the hatch and sent him sprawling. He stood and got hold of theidoor and swung it over and let it slam down and he turned to grab the boy but the boy had gotten upiand was doing his little dance of terror. For the love of God will you come on, he hissed. But the boyiwas pointing out the window and when he looked he went cold all over. Coming across the fielditoward the house were four bearded men and two women. He grabbed the boy by the hand. Christ, heisaid. Run. Run.iThey tore through the house to the front door and down the steps. Half way down the driveihe dragged the boy into the field. He looked back. They were partly screened by the ruins of the privetibut he knew they had minutes at most and maybe no minutes at all. At the bottom of the field theyicrashed through a stand of dead cane and out into the road and crossed into the woods on the far side.iHe redoubled his grip on the boy's wrist. Run, he whispered. We have to run. He looked toward theihouse but he could see nothing. If they came down the drive they would see him running through theitrees with the boy. This is the moment. This is the moment. He fell to the ground and pulled the boy toihim. Shh, he said. Shh.iAre they going to kill us? Papa?iShh.iThey lay in the leaves and the ash with their hearts pounding. He was going to starticoughing. He'd have put his hand over his mouth but the boy was holding on to it and would not let goiand in the other hand he was holding the pistol. He had to concentrate to stifle the cough and at theisame time he was trying to listen. He swung his chin through the leaves, trying to see. Keep your headidown, he whispered.iAre they coming?iNo.iThey crawled slowly through the leaves toward what looked like lower ground. He layilistening, holding the boy. He could hear them in the road talking. Voice of a woman. Then he heardithem in the dry leaves. He took the boy's hand and pushed the revolver into it. Take it, he whispered.iTake it. The boy was terrified. He put his arm around him and held him. His body so thin. Dont beiafraid, he said. If they find you you are going to have to do it. Do you understand? Shh. No crying. Doiyou hear me? You know how to do it. You put it in your mouth and point it up. Do it quick and hard.iDo you understand? Stop crying. Do you understand?iI think so.iNo. Do you understand?iYes.iSay yes I do Papa.iYes I do Papa.iHe looked down at him. All he saw was terror. He took the gun from him. No you dont, heisaid.iI dont know what to do, Papa. I dont know what to do. Where will you be?iIt's okay.iI dont know what to do.iShh. I'm right here. I wont leave you.iYou promise.iYes. I promise. I was going to run. To try and lead them away. But I cant leave you.iPapa?iShh. Stay down.iI'm so scared.iShh.iThey lay listening. Can you do it? When the time comes? When the time comes there willibe no time. Now is the time. Curse God and die. What if it doesnt fire? It has to fire. What if it doesntifire? Could you crush that beloved skull with a rock? Is there such a being within you of which youiknow nothing? Can there be? Hold him in your arms. Just so. The soul is quick. Pull him toward you.iKiss him. Quickly.iHe waited. The small nickelplated revolver in his hand. He was going to cough. He put hisiwhole mind to holding it back. He tried to listen but he could hear nothing. I wont leave you, heiwhispered. I wont ever leave you. Do you understand? He lay in the leaves holding the trembling child.iClutching the revolver. All through the long dusk and into the dark. Cold and starless. Blessed. Heibegan to believe they had a chance. We just have to wait, he whispered. So cold. He tried to think butihis mind swam. He was so weak. All his talk about running. He couldnt run. When it was truly blackiabout them he unfastened the straps on the backpack and pulled out the blankets and spread them overithe boy and soon the boy was sleeping.iIn the night he heard hideous shrieks coming from the house and he tried to put his handsiover the boy's ears and after a while the screaming stopped. He lay listening. Coming through theicanebrake into the road he'd seen a box. A thing like a child's playhouse. He realized it was where theyilay watching the road. Lying in wait and ringing the bell in the house for their companions to come. Heidozed and woke. What is coming? Footsteps in the leaves. No. Just the wind. Nothing. He sat up andilooked toward the house but he could see only darkness. He shook the boy awake. Come on, he said.iWe have to go. The boy didnt answer but he knew he was awake. He pulled the blankets free andistrapped them onto the knapsack. Come on, he whispered.iThey set out through the dark woods. There was a moon somewhere beyond the asheniovercast and they could just make out the trees. They staggered on like drunks. If they find us they'llikill us, wont they Papa.iShh. No more talking.iWont they Papa.iShh. Yes. Yes they will.iHe'd no idea what direction they might have taken and his fear was that they might circleiand return to the house. He tried to remember if he knew anything about that or if it were only a fable.iIn what direction did lost men veer? Perhaps it changed with hemispheres. Or handedness. Finally heiput it out of his mind. The notion that there could be anything to correct for. His mind was betrayingihim. Phantoms not heard from in a thousand years rousing slowly from their sleep. Correct for that.iThe boy was tottering on his feet. He asked to be carried, stumbling and slurring his words, and theiman did carry him and he fell asleep on his shoulder instantly. He knew he couldnt carry him far.iHe woke in the dark of the woods in the leaves shivering violently. He sat up and felt aboutifor the boy. He held his hand to the thin ribs. Warmth and movement. Heartbeat.iWhen he woke again it was almost light enough to see. He threw back the blanket andistood and almost fell. He steadied himself and tried to see about him in the gray woods. How far hadithey come? He walked to the top of a rise and crouched and watched the day accrue. The chary dawn,ithe cold illucid world. In the distance what looked to be a pine wood, raw and black. A colorless worldiof wire and crepe. He went back and got the boy and made him sit up. His head kept slumping forward.iWe have to go, he said. We have to go.iHe carried him across the field, stopping to rest each fifty counted steps. When he got to theipines he knelt and laid him in the gritty duff and covered him with the blankets and sat watching him.iHe looked like something out of a deathcamp. Starved, exhausted, sick with fear. He leaned and kissedihim and got up and walked out to the edge of the woods and then he walked the perimeter round to seeiif they were safe.iAcross the fields to the south he could see the shape of a house and a barn. Beyond the treesithe curve of a road. A long drive with dead grass. Dead ivy along a stone wall and a mailbox and aifence along the road and the dead trees beyond. Cold and silent. Shrouded in the carbon fog. He walkediback and sat beside the boy. It was desperation that had led him to such carelessness and he knew thatihe could not do that again. No matter what.iThe boy wouldnt wake for hours. Still if he did he'd be terrified. It had happened before. Heithought about waking him but he knew that he wouldnt remember anything if he did. He'd trained himito lie in the woods like a fawn. For how long? In the end he took the pistol from his belt and laid itialongside him under the blankets and rose and set out.iHe came upon the barn from the hill above it, stopping to watch and to listen. He made hisiway down through the ruins of an old apple orchard, black and gnarly stumps, dead grass to his knees.iHe stood in the door of the barn and listened. Pale slatted light. He walked along the dusty stalls. Heistood in the center of the barn bay and listened but there was nothing. He climbed the ladder to the loftiand he was so weak he wasnt sure he was going to make it to the top. He walked down to the end of theiloft and looked out the high gable window at the country below, the pieced land dead and gray, theifence, the road.iThere were bales of hay in the loft floor and he squatted and sorted a handful of seeds fromithem and sat chewing. Coarse and dry and dusty. They had to contain some nutrition. He rose andirolled two of the bales across the floor and let them fall into the bay below. Two dusty thumps. Heiwent back to the gable and stood studying what he could see of the house beyond the corner of theibarn. Then he climbed back down the ladder.iThe grass between the house and the barn looked untrodden. He crossed to the porch. Theiporch screening rotted and falling away. A child's bicycle. The kitchen door stood open and he crossedithe porch and stood in the doorway. Cheap plywood paneling curled with damp. Collapsing into theiroom. A red formica table. He crossed the room and opened the refrigerator door. Something sat on oneiof the racks in a coat of gray fur. He shut the door. Trash everywhere. He took a broom from the corneriand poked about with the handle. He climbed onto the counter and felt his way through the dust on topiof the cabinets. A mousetrap. A packet of something. He blew away the dust. It was a grape flavoredipowder to make drinks with. He put it in the pocket of his coat.iHe went through the house room by room. He found nothing. A spoon in a bedside drawer.iHe put that in his pocket. He thought there might be some clothes in a closet or some bedding but thereiwasnt. He went back out and crossed to the garage. He sorted through tools. Rakes. A shovel. Jars ofinails and bolts on a shelf. A boxcutter. He held it to the light and looked at the rusty blade and put itiback. Then he picked it up again. He took a screwdriver from a coffee can and opened the handle.iInside were four new blades. He took out the old blade and laid it on the shelf and put in one of the newiones and screwed the handle back together and retracted the blade and put the cutter in his pocket.iThen he picked up the screwdriver and put that in his pocket as well.iHe walked back out to the barn. He had a piece of cloth that he intended to use to collectiseeds from the haybales but when he got to the barn he stopped and stood listening to the wind. Aicreaking of tin somewhere high in the roof above him. There was yet a lingering odor of cows in theibarn and he stood there thinking about cows and he realized they were extinct. Was that true? Thereicould be a cow somewhere being fed and cared for. Could there? Fed what? Saved for what? Beyondithe open door the dead grass rasped dryly in the wind. He walked out and stood looking across theifields toward the pine wood where the boy lay sleeping. He walked up through the orchard and then heistopped again. He'd stepped on something. He took a step back and knelt and parted the grass with hisihands. It was an apple. He picked it up and held it to the light. Hard and brown and shriveled. He wipediit with the cloth and bit into it. Dry and almost tasteless. But an apple. He ate it entire, seeds and all. Heiheld the stem between his thumb and forefinger and let it drop. Then he went treading softly throughithe grass. His feet were still wrapped in the remnants of the coat and the shreds of tarp and he sat andiuntied them and stuffed the wrappings in his pocket and went down the rows barefoot. By the time heigot to the bottom of the orchard he had four more apples and he put them in his pocket and came back.iHe went row by row till he'd trod a puzzle in the grass. He'd more apples than he could carry. He feltiout the spaces about the trunks and filled his pockets full and he piled apples in the hood of his parkaibehind his head and carried apples stacked along his forearm against his chest. He dumped them in aipile at the door of the barn and sat there and wrapped up his numb feet.iIn the mudroom off the kitchen he'd seen an old wicker basket full of masonjars. Heidragged the basket out into the floor and set the jars out of it and then tipped over the basket and tappediout the dirt. Then he stopped. What had he seen? A drainpipe. A trellis. The dark serpentine of a deadivine running down it like the track of some enterprise upon a graph. He stood up and walked backithrough the kitchen and out into the yard and stood looking at the house. The windows giving back theigray and nameless day. The drainpipe ran down the corner of the porch. He was still holding the basketiand he set it down in the grass and climbed the steps again. The pipe came down the corner post andiinto a concrete tank. He brushed away the trash and rotted bits of screening from the cover. He wentiback into the kitchen and got the broom and came out and swept the cover clean and set the broom inithe corner and lifted the cover from the tank. Inside was a tray filled with a wet gray sludge from theiroof mixed with a compost of dead leaves and twigs. He lifted out the tray and set it in the floor.iUnderneath was white gravel. He scooped back the gravel with his hand. The tank beneath was fillediwith charcoal, pieces burned out of whole sticks and limbs in carbon effigies of the trees themselves.iHe put the tray back. In the floor was a green brass ringpull. He reached and got the broom and sweptiaway the ash. There were sawlines in the boards. He swept the boards clean and knelt and hooked hisifingers in the ring and lifted the trap door and swung it open. Down there in the darkness was a cisternifilled with water so sweet that he could smell it. He lay in the floor on his stomach and reached down.iHe could just touch the water. He scooted forward and reached again and laved up a handful of it andismelled and tasted it and then drank. He lay there a long time, lifting up the water to his mouth aipalmful at a time. Nothing in his memory anywhere of anything so good.iHe went back to the mudroom and returned with two of the jars and an old blue enameledipan. He wiped out the pan and dipped it full of water and used it to clean the jars. Then he reachedidown and sank one of the jars till it was full and raised it up dripping. The water was so clear. He heldiit to the light. A single bit of sediment coiling in the jar on some slow hydraulic axis. He tipped the jariand drank and he drank slowly but still he drank nearly the whole jar. He sat there with his stomachibloated. He could have drunk more but he didnt. He poured the remaining water into the other jar andirinsed it out and he filled both jars and then let down the wooden cover over the cistern and rose andiwith his pockets full of apples and carrying the jars of water he set out across the fields toward the pineiwood.iHe was gone longer than he'd meant to be and he hurried his steps the best he could, theiwater swinging and gurgling in the shrunken swag of his gut. He stopped to rest and began again.iWhen he got to the woods the boy did not look as if he'd even stirred and he knelt and set the jarsicarefully in the duff and picked up the pistol and put it in his belt and then he just sat there watchingihim.iThey spent the afternoon sitting wrapped in the blankets and eating apples. Sipping theiwater from the jars. He took the packet of grape flavor from his pocket and opened it and poured it intoithe jar and stirred it and gave it to the boy. You did good Papa, he said. He slept while the boy keptiwatch and in the evening they got out their shoes and put them on and went down to the farmhouse andicollected the rest of the apples. They filled three jars with water and screwed on the two-piece capsifrom a box of them he'd found on a shelf in the mudroom. Then he wrapped everything in one of theiblankets and packed it into the knapsack and tied the other blankets across the top of the knapsack andishouldered it up. They stood in the door watching the light draw down over the world to the west. Thenithey went down the drive and set out upon the road again.iThe boy hung on to his coat and he kept to the edge of the road and tried to feel out theipavement under his feet in the dark. In the distance he could hear thunder and after a while there wereidim shudderings of light ahead of them. He got out the plastic sheeting from the knapsack but thereiwas hardly enough of it left to cover them and after a while it began to rain. They stumbled along sideiby side. There was nowhere to go. They had the hoods of their coats up but the coats were getting wetiand heavy from the rain. He stopped in the road and tried to rearrange the tarp. The boy was shakingibadly.iYou're freezing, arent you?iYes.iIf we stop we'll get really cold.iI'm really cold now.iWhat do you want to do?iCan we stop?iYes. Okay. We can stop.iIt was as long a night as he could remember out of a great plenty of such nights. They layion the wet ground by the side of the road under the blankets with the rain rattling on the tarp and heiheld the boy and after a while the boy stopped shaking and after a while he slept. The thunder trundlediaway to the north and ceased and there was just the rain. He slept and woke and the rain slackened andiafter a while it stopped. He wondered if it was even midnight. He was coughing and it got worse and itiwoke the child. The dawn was a long time coming. He raised up from time to time to look to the eastiand after a while it was day.iHe wrapped their coats each in turn around the trunk of a small tree and twisted out theiwater. He had the boy take off his clothes and he wrapped him in one of the blankets and while heistood shivering he wrung the water out of his clothes and passed them back. The ground where they'dislept was dry and they sat there with the blankets draped over them and ate apples and drank water.iThen they set out upon the road again, slumped and cowled and shivering in their rags like mendicantifriars sent forth to find their keep.iBy evening they at least were dry. They studied the pieces of map but he'd little notion ofiwhere they were. He stood at a rise in the road and tried to take his bearings in the twilight. They leftithe pike and took a narrow road through the country and came at last upon a bridge and a dry creek andithey crawled down the bank and huddled underneath.iCan we have a fire? the boy said.iWe dont have a lighter.iThe boy looked away.iI'm sorry. I dropped it. I didnt want to tell you.iThat's okay.iI'll find us some flint. I've been looking. And we've still got the little bottle of gasoline.iOkay.iAre you very cold?iI'm okay.iThe boy lay with his head in the man's lap. After a while he said: They're going to kill thoseipeople, arent they?iYes.iWhy do they have to do that?iI dont know.iAre they going to eat them?iI dont know.iThey're going to eat them, arent they?iYes.iAnd we couldnt help them because then they'd eat us too.iYes.iAnd that's why we couldnt help them.iYes.iOkay.iThey passed through towns that warned people away with messages scrawled on theibillboards. The billboards had been whited out with thin coats of paint in order to write on them andithrough the paint could be seen a pale palimpsest of advertisements for goods which no longer existed.iThey sat by the side of the road and ate the last of the apples.iWhat is it? the man said.iNothing.iWe'll find something to eat. We always do.iThe boy didnt answer. The man watched him.iThat's not it, is it?iIt's okay.iTell me.iThe boy looked away down the road.iI want you to tell me. It's okay.iHe shook his head.iLook at me, the man said.iHe turned and looked. He looked like he'd been crying.iJust tell me.iWe wouldnt ever eat anybody, would we?iNo. Of course not.iEven if we were starving?iWe're starving now.iYou said we werent.iI said we werent dying. I didnt say we werent starving.iBut we wouldnt.iNo. We wouldnt.iNo matter what.iNo. No matter what.iBecause we're the good guys.iYes.iAnd we're carrying the fire.iAnd we're carrying the fire. Yes.iOkay.iHe found pieces of flint or chert in a ditch but in the end it was easier to rake the pliersidown the side of a rock at the bottom of which he'd made a small pile of tinder soaked in gas. Twoimore days. Then three. They were starving right enough. The country was looted, ransacked, ravaged.iRifled of every crumb. The nights were blinding cold and casket black and the long reach of theimorning had a terrible silence to it. Like a dawn before battle. The boy's candlecolored skin was all butitranslucent. With his great staring eyes he'd the look of an alien.iHe was beginning to think that death was finally upon them and that they should find someiplace to hide where they would not be found. There were times when he sat watching the boy sleep thatihe would begin to sob uncontrollably but it wasnt about death. He wasnt sure what it was about but heithought it was about beauty or about goodness. Things that he'd no longer any way to think about at all.iThey squatted in a bleak wood and drank ditchwater strained through a rag. He'd seen the boy in aidream laid out upon a coolingboard and woke in horror. What he could bear in the waking world heicould not by night and he sat awake for fear the dream would return.iThey scrabbled through the charred ruins of houses they would not have entered before. Aicorpse floating in the black water of a basement among the trash and rusting ductwork. He stood in ailivingroom partly burned and open to the sky. The waterbuckled boards sloping away into the yard.iSoggy volumes in a bookcase. He took one down and opened it and then put it back. Everything damp.iRotting. In a drawer he found a candle. No way to light it. He put it in his pocket. He walked out in theigray light and stood and he saw for a brief moment the absolute truth of the world. The cold relentlessicircling of the intestate earth. Darkness implacable. The blind dogs of the sun in their running. Theicrushing black vacuum of the universe. And somewhere two hunted animals trembling like ground-ifoxes in their cover. Borrowed time and borrowed world and borrowed eyes with which to sorrow it.iAt the edge of a small town they sat in the cab of a truck to rest, staring out a glass washediclean by the recent rains. A light dusting of ash. Exhausted. By the roadside stood another sign thatiwarned of death, the letters faded with the years. He almost smiled. Can you read that? he said.iYes.iDont pay any attention. There's no one here.iAre they dead?iI think so.iI wish that little boy was with us.iLet's go, he said.iRich dreams now which he was loathe to wake from. Things no longer known in the world.iThe cold drove him forth to mend the fire. Memory of her crossing the lawn toward the house in theiearly morning in a thin rose gown that clung to her breasts. He thought each memory recalled must doisome violence to its origins. As in a party game. Say the word and pass it on. So be sparing. What youialter in the remembering has yet a reality, known or not.iThey walked through the streets wrapped in the filthy blankets. He held the pistol at hisiwaist and held the boy by the hand. At the farther edge of the town they came upon a solitary house inia field and they crossed and entered and walked through the rooms. They came upon themselves in aimirror and he almost raised the pistol. It's us, Papa, the boy whispered. It's us.iHe stood in the back door and looked out at the fields and the road beyond and the bleakicountry beyond the road. On the patio was a barbeque pit made from a fifty-five gallon drum slitiendways with a torch and set in a welded iron frame. A few dead trees in the yard. A fence. A metalitool shed. He shrugged off the blanket and wrapped it around the boy's shoulder.iI want you to wait here.iI want to go with you.iI'm only going over there to take a look. Just sit here. You'll be able to see me the wholeitime. I promise.iHe crossed the yard and pushed open the door, still holding the gun. It was a sort of gardenished. Dirt floor. Metal shelves with some plastic flowerpots. Everything covered with ash. There wereigarden tools standing in the corner. A lawnmower. A wooden bench under the window and beside it aimetal cabinet. He opened the cabinet. Old catalogs. Packets of seed. Begonia. Morning glory. He stuckithem in his pocket. For what? On the top shelf were two cans of motor oil and he put the pistol in hisibelt and reached and got them and set them on the bench. They were very old, made of cardboard withimetal endcaps. The oil had soaked through the cardboard but still they seemed full. He stepped backiand looked out the door. The boy was sitting on the back steps of the house wrapped in the blanketsiwatching him. When he turned he saw a gascan in the corner behind the door. He knew it couldnt haveigas in it yet when he tilted it with his foot and let it fall back again there was a gentle slosh. He pickediit up and carried it to the bench and tried to unscrew the cap but he could not. He got the pliers out ofihis coat pocket and extended the jaws and tried it. It would just fit and he twisted off the cap and laid ition the bench and sniffed the can. Rank odor. Years old. But it was gasoline and it would burn. Heiscrewed the cap back on and put the pliers in his pocket. He looked around for some smaller containeribut there wasnt one. He shouldnt have thrown away the bottle. Check the house.iCrossing the grass he felt half faint and he had to stop. He wondered if it was from smellingithe gasoline. The boy was watching him. How many days to death? Ten? Not so many more than that.iHe couldnt think. Why had he stopped? He turned and looked down at the grass. He walked back.iTesting the ground with his feet. He stopped and turned again. Then he went back to the shed. Heireturned with a garden spade and in the place where he'd stood he chucked the blade into the ground. Itisank to half its length and stopped with a hollow wooden sound. He began to shovel away the dirt.iSlow going. God he was tired. He leaned on the spade. He raised his head and looked at theiboy. The boy sat as before. He bent to his work again. Before long he was resting between eachishovelful. What he finally unburied was a piece of plywood covered with roofingfelt. He shoveled outialong the edges. It was a door perhaps three feet by six. At one end was a hasp with a padlock taped upiin a plastic bag. He rested, holding on to the handle of the spade, his forehead in the crook of his arm.iWhen he looked up again the boy was standing in the yard just a few feet from him. He was veryiscared. Dont open it, Papa, he whispered.iIt's okay.iPlease, Papa. Please.iIt's okay.iNo it's not.iHe had his fists clutched at his chest and he was bobbing up and down with fear. The manidropped the shovel and put his arms around him. Come on, he said. Let's just go sit on the porch andirest a while.iThen can we go?iLet's just sit for a while.iOkay.iThey sat wrapped in the blankets and looked out at the yard. They sat for a long time. Heitried to explain to the boy that there was no one buried in the yard but the boy just started crying. Afteria while he even thought that maybe the child was right.iLet's just sit, he said. We wont even talk.iOkay.iThey walked through the house again. He found a beer bottle and an old rag of a curtainiand he tore an edge from the cloth and stuffed it down the neck of the bottle with a coathanger. This isiour new lamp, he said.iHow can we light it?iI found some gasoline in the shed. And some oil. I'll show you.iOkay.iCome on, the man said. Everything's okay. I promise.iBut when he bent to see into the boy's face under the hood of the blanket he very muchifeared that something was gone that could not be put right again.iThey went out and crossed the yard to the shed. He set the bottle on the bench and he took aiscrewdriver and punched a hole in one of the cans of oil and then punched a smaller one to help itidrain. He pulled the wick out of the bottle and poured the bottle about half full, old straight weight oilithick and gelid with the cold and a long time pouring. He twisted the cap off the gascan and he made aismall paper spill from one of the seedpackets and poured gas into the bottle and put his thumb over theimouth and shook it. Then he poured some out into a clay dish and took the rag and stuffed it back intoithe bottle with the screwdriver. He took a piece of flint from his pocket and got the pair of pliers andistruck the flint against the serrated jaw. He tried it a couple of times and then he stopped and pouredimore gasoline into the dish.iThis may flare up, he said. The boy nodded. He raked sparks into the dish and it bloomediinto flame with a low whoosh. He reached and got the bottle and tilted it and lit the wick and blew outithe flame in the dish and handed the smoking bottle to the boy. Here, he said. Take it.iWhat are we going to do?iHold your hand in front of the flame. Dont let it go out.iHe rose and took the pistol from his belt. This door looks like the other door, he said. Butiit's not. I know you're scared. That's okay. I think there may be things in there and we have to take ailook. There's no place else to go. This is it. I want you to help me. If you dont want to hold the lampiyou'll have to take the pistol.iI'll hold the lamp.iOkay. This is what the good guys do. They keep trying. They dont give up.iOkay.iHe led the boy out into the yard trailing the black smoke from the lamp. He put the pistol inihis belt and picked up the spade and began to chop the hasp out of the plywood. He wedged the corneriof the blade under it and pried it up and then knelt and took hold of the lock and twisted the wholeithing loose and pitched it into the grass. He pried the blade under the door and got his fingers under itiand then stood and raised it up. Dirt went rattling down the boards. He looked at the boy. Are you alliright? he said. The boy nodded mutely, holding the lamp in front of him. The man swung the door overiand let it fall in the grass. Rough stairs carpentered out of two by tens leading down into the darkness.iHe reached and took the lamp from the boy. He started to descend the stairs but then he turned andileaned and kissed the child on the forehead.iThe bunker was walled with concrete block. A poured concrete floor laid over with kitchenitile. There were a couple of iron cots with bare springs, one against either wall, the mattress pads rollediup at the foot of them in army fashion. He turned and looked at the boy crouched above him blinking inithe smoke rising up from the lamp and then he descended to the lower steps and sat and held the lampiout. Oh my God, he whispered. Oh my God.iWhat is it Papa?iCome down. Oh my God. Come down.iCrate upon crate of canned goods. Tomatoes, peaches, beans, apricots. Canned hams.iCorned beef. Hundreds of gallons of water in ten gallon plastic jerry jugs. Paper towels, toiletpaper,ipaper plates. Plastic trashbags stuffed with blankets. He held his forehead in his hand. Oh my God, heisaid. He looked back at the boy. It's all right, he said. Come down.iPapa?iCome down. Come down and see.iHe stood the lamp on the step and went up and took the boy by the hand. Come on, he said.iIt's all right.iWhat did you find?iI found everything. Everything. Wait till you see. He led him down the stairs and picked upithe bottle and held the flame aloft. Can you see? he said. Can you see?iWhat is all this stuff, Papa?iIt's food. Can you read it?iPears. That says pears.iYes. Yes it does. Oh yes it does.iThere was just headroom for him to stand. He ducked under a lantern with a green metalishade hanging from a hook. He held the boy by the hand and they went along the rows of stenciledicartons. Chile, corn, stew, soup, spaghetti sauce. The richness of a vanished world. Why is this here?ithe boy said. Is it real? Oh yes. It's real.iHe pulled one of the boxes down and clawed it open and held up a can of peaches. It's hereibecause someone thought it might be needed.iBut they didnt get to use it.iNo. They didnt.iThey died.iYes.iIs it okay for us to take it?iYes. It is. They would want us to. Just like we would want them to.iThey were the good guys?iYes. They were.iLike us.iLike us. Yes.iSo it's okay.iYes. It's okay.iThere were knives and plastic utensils and silverware and kitchen tools in a plastic box. Aican opener. There were electric torches that didnt work. He found a box of batteries and dry cells andiwent through them. Mostly corroded and leaking an acid goo but some of them looked okay. He finallyigot one of the lanterns to work and he set it on the table and blew out the smoky flame of the lamp. Heitore a flap from the opened cardboard box and chased out the smoke with it and then he climbed up andilowered the trap door and turned and looked at the boy. What would you like for supper? he said.iPears.iGood choice. Pears it is.iHe took two paperware bowls from a stack of them wrapped in plastic and set them out onithe table. He unrolled the mattress pads on the bunks for them to sit on and he opened the carton ofipears and took out a can and set it on the table and clamped the lid with the can opener and began toiturn the wheel. He looked at the boy. The boy was sitting quietly on the bunk, still wrapped in theiblanket, watching. The man thought he had probably not fully committed himself to any of this. Youicould wake in the dark wet woods at any time. These will be the best pears you ever tasted, he said.iThe best. Just you wait.iThey sat side by side and ate the can of pears. Then they ate a can of peaches. They lickedithe spoons and tipped the bowls and drank the rich sweet syrup. They looked at each other.iOne more.iI dont want you to get sick.iI wont get sick.iYou havent eaten in a long time.iI know.iOkay.iHe put the boy to bed in the bunk and smoothed his filthy hair on the pillow and coveredihim with blankets. When he climbed up and lifted the door it was almost dark out. He went to theigarage and got the knapsack and came back and took a last look around and then went down the stepsiand pulled the door shut and jammed one of the handles of the pliers through the heavy inside hasp.iThe electric lantern was already beginning to dim and he looked through the stores until he found someicases of white gas in gallon cans. He got one of the cans out and set it on the table and unscrewed theicap and punched out the metal seal with a screwdriver. Then he took down the lamp from the hookioverhead and filled it. He'd already found a plastic box of butane lighters and he lit the lamp with oneiof them and adjusted the flame and hung it back up. Then he just sat on the bunk.iWhile the boy slept he began to go methodically through the stores. Clothes, sweaters,isocks. A stainless steel basin and sponges and bars of soap. Toothpaste and toothbrushes. In the bottomiof a big plastic jar of bolts and screws and miscellaneous hardware he found a double handful of goldikrugerrands in a cloth sack. He dumped them out and kneaded them in his hand and looked at them andithen scooped them back into the jar along with the hardware and put the jar back on the shelf.iHe sorted through everything, shifting boxes and crates from one side of the room to theiother. There was a small steel door that led into a second room where bottles of gas were stored. In theicorner a chemical toilet. There were vent pipes in the walls covered with wire mesh and there wereidrains in the floor. It was getting warm in the bunker and he'd taken off his coat. He went throughieverything. He found a box of.45 ACP cartridges and three boxes of.30-30 rifle shells. What he didntifind was a gun. He took the battery lantern and walked over the floor and he checked the walls for anyihidden compartment. After a while he just sat on the bunk eating a bar of chocolate. There was no guniand there wasnt going to be one.iWhen he woke the gaslamp overhead was hissing softly. The bunker walls were there in theilight and the boxes and crates. He didnt know where he was. He was lying with his coat over him. Heisat up and looked at the boy asleep on the other bunk. He'd taken off his shoes but he didnt rememberithat either and he got them from under the bunk and pulled them on and climbed the stairs and pulledithe pliers from the hasp and lifted the door and peered out. Early morning. He looked at the house andihe looked out toward the road and he was about to lower the hatch door again when he stopped. Theivague gray light was in the west. They'd slept the night through and the day that followed. He loweredithe door and secured it again and climbed back down and sat on the bunk. He looked around at theisupplies. He'd been ready to die and now he wasnt going to and he had to think about that. Anyoneicould see the hatch lying in the yard and they would know at once what it was. He had to think aboutiwhat to do. This was not hiding in the woods. This was the last thing from that. Finally he rose andiwent to the table and hooked up the little two burner gas stove and lit it and got out a frying pan and aikettle and opened the plastic box of kitchen implements.iWhat woke the boy was him grinding coffee in a small hand grinder. He sat up and starediall around. Papa? he said.iHi. Are you hungry?iI have to go to the bathroom. I have to pee.iHe pointed with the spatula toward the low steel door. He didnt know how to use the toiletibut they would use it anyway. They werent going to be here that long and he wasnt going to be openingiand closing the hatch any more than they had to. The boy went past, his hair matted with sweat. Whatiis that? he said.iCoffee. Ham. Biscuits.iWow, the boy said.iHe dragged a footlocker across the floor between the bunks and covered it with a towel andiset out the plates and cups and plastic utensils. He set out a bowl of biscuits covered with a handtoweliand a plate of butter and a can of condensed milk. Salt and pepper. He looked at the boy. The boyilooked drugged. He brought the frying pan from the stove and forked a piece of browned ham onto theiboy's plate and scooped scrambled eggs from the other pan and ladled out spoonfuls of baked beansiand poured coffee into their cups. The boy looked up at him.iGo ahead, he said. Dont let it get cold.iWhat do I eat first?iWhatever you like.iIs this coffee?iYes. Here. You put the butter on your biscuits. Like this.iOkay.iAre you all right?iI dont know.iDo you feel okay?iYes.iWhat is it?iDo you think we should thank the people?iThe people?iThe people who gave us all this.iWell. Yes, I guess we could do that.iWill you do it?iWhy dont you?iI dont know how.iYes you do. You know how to say thank you.iThe boy sat staring at his plate. He seemed lost. The man was about to speak when he said:iDear people, thank you for all this food and stuff. We know that you saved it for yourself and if youiwere here we wouldnt eat it no matter how hungry we were and we're sorry that you didnt get to eat itiand we hope that you're safe in heaven with God.iHe looked up. Is that okay? he said. Yes. I think that's okay.iHe wouldnt stay in the bunker by himself. He followed the man back and forth across theilawn while he carried the plastic jugs of water to the bathroom at the rear of the house. They took theilittle stove with them and a couple of pans and he heated water and poured it into the tub and poured iniwater from the plastic jugs. It took a long time but he wanted it to be good and warm. When the tubiwas almost full the boy got undressed and stepped shivering into the water and sat. Scrawny and filthyiand naked. Holding his shoulders. The only light was from the ring of blue teeth in the burner of theistove. What do you think? the man said.iWarm at last.iWarm at last?iYes.iWhere did you get that?iI dont know.iOkay. Warm at last.iHe washed his dirty matted hair and bathed him with the soap and sponges. He drainediaway the filthy water he sat in and laved fresh warm water over him from the pan and wrapped himishivering in a towel and wrapped him again in a blanket. He combed his hair and looked at him. Steamiwas coming off of him like smoke. Are you okay? he said.iMy feet are cold.iYou'll have to wait for me.iHurry.iHe bathed and then climbed out and poured detergent into the bathwater and shoved theiristinking jeans down into the water with a toilet plunger. Are you ready? he said.iYes.iHe turned down the burner until it sputtered and went out and then he turned on theiflashlight and laid it in the floor. They sat on the edge of the tub and pulled their shoes on and then heihanded the boy the pan and soap and he took the stove and the little bottle of gas and the pistol andiwrapped in their blankets they went back across the yard to the bunker.iThey sat on the cot with a checkerboard between them, wearing new sweaters and socksiand swaddled in the new blankets. He'd hooked up a small gas heater and they drank Coca Cola out ofiplastic mugs and after a while he went back to the house and wrung the water out of the jeans andibrought them back and hung them to dry.iHow long can we stay here Papa?iNot long.iHow long is that?iI dont know. Maybe one more day. Two.iBecause it's dangerous.iYes.iDo you think they'll find us?iNo. They wont find us.iThey might find us.iNo they wont. They wont find us.iLater when the boy was asleep he went to the house and dragged some of the furniture outionto the lawn. Then he dragged out a mattress and laid it over the hatch and from inside he pulled it upiover the plywood and carefully lowered the door so that the mattress covered it completely. It wasntimuch of a ruse but it was better than nothing. While the boy slept he sat on the bunk and by the light ofithe lantern he whittled fake bullets from a treebranch with his knife, fitting them carefully into theiempty bores of the cylinder and then whittling again. He shaped the ends with the knife and sandedithem smooth with salt and he stained them with soot until they were the color of lead. When he had allifive of them done he fitted them to the bores and snapped the cylinder shut and turned the gun andilooked at it. Even this close the gun looked as if it were loaded and he laid it by and got up to feel theilegs of the jeans steaming above the heater.iHe'd saved the small handful of empty cartridge casings for the pistol but they were goneiwith everything else. He should have kept them in his pocket. He'd even lost the last one. He thoughtihe might have been able to reload them out of the.45 cartridges. The primers would probably fit if heicould get them out without ruining them. Shave the bullets to size with the boxcutter. He got up andimade a last tour of the stores. Then he turned down the lamp until the flame puttered out and he kissedithe boy and crawled into the other bunk under the clean blankets and gazed one more time at this tinyiparadise trembling in the orange light from the heater and then he fell asleep.iThe town had been abandoned years ago but they walked the littered streets carefully, theiboy holding on to his hand. They passed a metal trashdump where someone had once tried to burnibodies. The charred meat and bones under the damp ash might have been anonymous save for theishapes of the skulls. No longer any smell. There was a market at the end of the street and in one of theiaisles piled with empty boxes there were three metal grocery carts. He looked them over and pulled oneiof them free and squatted and turned the wheels and then stood and pushed it up the aisle and backiagain.iWe could take two of them, the boy said.iNo.iI could push one.iYou're the scout. I need you to be our lookout.iWhat are we going to do with all the stuff?iWe'll just have to take what we can.iDo you think somebody is coming?iYes. Sometime.iYou said nobody was coming.iI didnt mean ever.iI wish we could live here.iI know.iWe could be on the lookout.iWe are on the lookout.iWhat if some good guys came?iWell, I dont think we're likely to meet any good guys on the road.iWe're on the road.iI know.iIf you're on the lookout all the time does that mean that you're scared all the time?iWell. I suppose you have to be scared enough to be on the lookout in the first place. To beicautious. Watchful.iBut the rest of the time you're not scared?iThe rest of the time.iYeah.iI dont know. Maybe you should always be on the lookout. If trouble comes when you leastiexpect it then maybe the thing to do is to always expect it.iDo you always expect it? Papa?iI do. But sometimes I might forget to be on the lookout.iHe sat the boy on the footlocker under the gaslamp and with a plastic comb and a pair ofiscissors he set about cutting his hair. He tried to do a good job and it took some time. When he wasidone he took the towel from around the boy's shoulders and he scooped the golden hair from the flooriand wiped the boy's face and shoulders with a damp cloth and held a mirror for him to see.iYou did a good job, Papa.iGood.iI look really skinny.iYou are really skinny.iHe cut his own hair but it didnt come out so good. He trimmed his beard with the scissorsiwhile a pan of water heated and then he shaved himself with a plastic safety razor. The boy watched.iWhen he was done he regarded himself in the mirror. He seemed to have no chin. He turned to the boy.iHow do I look? The boy cocked his head. I dont know, he said. Will you be cold?iThey ate a sumptuous meal by candlelight. Ham and green beans and mashed potatoes withibiscuits and gravy. He'd found four quarts of bonded whiskey still in the paper bags in which they'dibeen purchased and he drank a little of it in a glass with water. It made him dizzy before he'd evenifinished it and he drank no more. They ate peaches and cream over biscuits for dessert and drankicoffee. The paper plates and plastic tableware he dumped in a trash-bag. Then they played checkers andithen he put the boy to bed.iIn the night he was wakened by the muted patter of rain on the mattress over the door aboveithem. He thought it must be raining pretty hard for him to hear it. He got up with the flashlight andiclimbed up and raised the hatch and played the light across the yard. The yard was already flooded andithe rain was slashing down. He closed the hatch. Water had leaked in and dripped down the stairs butihe thought the bunker itself seemed pretty watertight. He went to see about the boy. He was damp withisweat and the man pulled back one of the blankets and fanned his face and then turned down the heateriand went back to bed.iWhen he woke again he thought the rain had stopped. But that wasnt what woke him. He'dibeen visited in a dream by creatures of a kind he'd never seen before. They did not speak. He thoughtithat they'd been crouching by the side of his cot as he slept and then had skulked away on hisiawakening. He turned and looked at the boy. Maybe he understood for the first time that to the boy heiwas himself an alien. A being from a planet that no longer existed. The tales of which were suspect. Heicould not construct for the child's pleasure the world he'd lost without constructing the loss as well andihe thought perhaps the child had known this better than he. He tried to remember the dream but heicould not. All that was left was the feeling of it. He thought perhaps they'd come to warn him. Of what?iThat he could not enkindle in the heart of the child what was ashes in his own. Even now some part ofihim wished they'd never found this refuge. Some part of him always wished it to be over.iHe checked the valve on the tank that it was turned off and swung the little stove around onithe footlocker and sat and went to work dismantling it. He unscrewed the bottom panel and he removedithe burner assembly and disconnected the two burners with a small crescent wrench. He tipped out theiplastic jar of hardware and sorted out a bolt to thread into the fitting of the junction and then tightenediit down. He connected the hose from the tank and held the little potmetal burner up in his hand, smalliand lightweight. He set it on the locker and carried the sheetmetal over and put it in the trash and wentito the stairs to check the weather. The mattress on top of the hatch had soaked up a good deal of wateriand the door was hard to lift. He stood with it resting on his shoulders and looked out at the day. A lightidrizzle falling. Impossible to tell what time of the day he was looking at. He looked at the house and heilooked out over the dripping countryside and then let the door back down and descended the steps andiset about making breakfast.iThey spent the day eating and sleeping. He'd planned to leave but the rain was justificationienough to stay. The grocery cart was in the shed. Not likely that anyone would travel the road today.iThey sorted through the stores and set out what they could take, making of it a measured cube in theicorner of the shelter. The day was brief, hardly a day at all. By dark the rain had ceased and theyiopened the hatch and began to carry boxes and parcels and plastic bags across the wet yard to the shediand to pack the cart. The faintly lit hatchway lay in the dark of the yard like a grave yawning atijudgment day in some old apocalyptic painting. When the cart was loaded with all that it could hold heitied a plastic tarp down over it and fastened the grommets to the wire with short bungee cords and theyistood back and looked at it with the flashlight. He thought that he should have gotten a couple of extraisets of wheels from the other carts in the store but it was too late now. He should have saved theimotorcycle mirror off their old cart too. They ate dinner and slept till morning and then bathed againiwith sponges and washed their hair in basins of warm water. They ate breakfast and by first light theyiwere on the road, wearing fresh masks cut from sheeting, the boy going ahead with a broom andiclearing the way of sticks and branches and the man bent over the handle of the cart watching the roadifall away before them.iThe cart was too heavy to push into the wet woods and they nooned in the middle of theiroad and fixed hot tea and ate the last of the canned ham with crackers and with mustard andiapplesauce. Sitting back to back and watching the road. Do you know where we are Papa? the boy said.iSort of.iHow sort of?iWell. I think we're about two hundred miles from the coast. As the crow flies.iAs the crow flies?iYes. It means going in a straight line.iAre we going to get there soon?iNot real soon. Pretty soon. We're not going as the crow flies.iBecause crows dont have to follow roads?iYes.iThey can go wherever they want.iYes.iDo you think there might be crows somewhere?iI dont know.iBut what do you think?iI think it's unlikely.iCould they fly to Mars or someplace?iNo. They couldnt.iBecause it's too far?iYes.iEven if they wanted to.iEven if they wanted to.iWhat if they tried and they just got half way or something and then they were too tired.iWould they fall back down?iWell. They really couldnt get halfway because they'd be in space and there's not any air inispace so they wouldnt be able to fly and besides it would be too cold and they'd freeze to death.iOh.iAnyway they wouldnt know where Mars was.iDo we know where Mars is?iSort of.iIf we had a spaceship could we go there?iWell. If you had a really good spaceship and you had people to help you I suppose youicould go.iWould there be food and stuff when you got there?iNo. There's nothing there.iOh.iThey sat for a long time. They sat on their folded blankets and watched the road in bothidirections. No wind. Nothing. After a while the boy said: There's not any crows. Are there?iNo.iJust in books.iYes. Just in books.iI didnt think so.iAre you ready?iYes.iThey rose and put away their cups and the rest of the crackers. The man piled the blanketsion top of the cart and fastened the tarp down and then he stood looking at the boy. What? the boy said.iI know you thought we were going to die.iYeah.iBut we didnt.iNo.iOkay.iCan I ask you something? Sure.iIf you were a crow could you fly up high enough to see the sun?iYes. You could.iI thought so. That would be really neat.iYes it would. Are you ready?iYes.iHe stopped. What happened to your flute?iI threw it away.iYou threw it away?iYes.iOkay.iOkay.iIn the long gray dusk they crossed a river and stopped and looked down from the concreteibalustrade at the slow dead water passing underneath. Sketched upon the pall of soot downstream theioutline of a burnt city like a black paper scrim. They saw it again just at dark pushing the heavy cart upia long hill and they stopped to rest and he turned the cart sideways in the road against it rolling. Theirimasks were already gray at the mouth and their eyes darkly cupped. They sat in the ashes by the side ofithe road and looked out to the east where the shape of the city was darkening into the coming night.iThey saw no lights.iDo you think there's anyone there, Papa?iI dont know.iHow soon can we stop?iWe can stop now.iOn the hill?iWe can get the cart down to those rocks and cover it with limbs.iIs this a good place to stop?iWell, people dont like to stop on hills. And we dont like for people to stop.iSo it's a good place for us.iI think so.iBecause we're smart.iWell, let's not get too smart.iOkay.iAre you ready?iYes.iThe boy stood up and got his broom and put it over his shoulder. He looked at his father.iWhat are our long term goals? he said.iWhat?iOur long term goals.iWhere did you hear that?iI dont know.iNo, where did you?iYou said it.iWhen?iA long time ago.iWhat was the answer?iI dont know.iWell. I dont either. Come on. It's getting dark.iLate in the day following as they rounded a bend in the road the boy stopped and put hisihand on the carriage. Papa, he whispered. The man looked up. A small figure distant on the road, bentiand shuffling.iHe stood leaning on the handle of the grocery cart. Well, he said. Who's this?iWhat should we do, Papa?iIt could be a decoy.iWhat are we going to do?iLet's just follow. We'll see if he turns around.iOkay.iThe traveler was not one for looking back. They followed him for a while and then theyiovertook him. An old man, small and bent. He carried on his back an old army rucksack with a blanketiroll tied across the top of it and he tapped along with a peeled stick for a cane. When he saw them heiveered to the side of the road and turned and stood warily. He had a filthy towel tied under his jaw as ifihe suffered from toothache and even by their new world standards he smelled terrible.iI dont have anything, he said. You can look if you want.iWe're not robbers.iHe leaned one ear forward. What? he called.iI said we're not robbers.iWhat are you?iThey'd no way to answer the question. He wiped his nose with the back of his wrist andistood waiting. He had no shoes at all and his feet were wrapped in rags and cardboard tied with greenitwine and any number of layers of vile clothing showed through the tears and holes in it. Of a suddenihe seemed to wilt even further. He leaned on his cane and lowered himself into the road where he satiamong the ashes with one hand over his head. He looked like a pile of rags fallen off a cart. They cameiforward and stood looking down at him. Sir? the man said. Sir?iThe boy squatted and put a hand on his shoulder. He's scared, Papa. The man is scared.iHe looked up the road and down. If this is an ambush he goes first, he said.iHe's just scared, Papa.iTell him we wont hurt him.iThe old man shook his head from side to side, his fingers laced in his filthy hair. The boyilooked up at his father.iMaybe he thinks we're not real.iWhat does he think we are?iI dont know.iWe cant stay here. We have to go.iHe's scared, Papa.iI dont think you should touch him.iMaybe we could give him something to eat.iHe stood looking off down the road. Damn, he whispered. He looked down at the old man.iPerhaps he'd turn into a god and they to trees. All right, he said.iHe untied the tarp and folded it back and rummaged through the canned goods and came upiwith a tin of fruit cocktail and took the can opener from his pocket and opened the tin and folded backithe lid and walked over and squatted and handed it to the boy.iWhat about a spoon?iHe's not getting a spoon.iThe boy took the tin and handed it to the old man. Take it, he whispered. Here.iThe old man raised his eyes and looked at the boy. The boy gestured at him with the tin. Heilooked like someone trying to feed a vulture broken in the road. It's okay, he said.iThe old man lowered his hand from his head. He blinked. Grayblue eyes half buried in theithin and sooty creases of his skin.iTake it, the boy said.iHe reached with his scrawny claws and took it and held it to his chest.iEat it, the boy said. It's good. He made tipping motions with his hands. The old man lookedidown at the tin. He took a fresh grip and lifted it, his nose wrinkling. His long and yellowed clawsiscrabbled at the metal. Then he tipped it and drank. The juice ran down his filthy beard. He lowered theican, chewing with difficulty. He jerked his head when he swallowed. Look, Papa, the boy whispered.iI see, the man said.iThe boy turned and looked at him.iI know what the question is, the man said. The answer is no.iWhat's the question?iCan we keep him. We cant.iI know.iYou know.iYeah.iAll right.iCan we give him something else?iLet's see how he does with this.iThey watched him eat. When he was done he sat holding the empty tin and looking downiinto it as if more might appear.iWhat do you want to give him?iWhat do you think he should have?iI dont think he should have anything. What do you want to give him?iWe could cook something on the stove. He could eat with us.iYou're talking about stopping. For the night.iYeah.iHe looked down at the old man and he looked at the road. All right, he said. But thenitomorrow we go on.iThe boy didnt answer.iThat's the best deal you're going to get.iOkay.iOkay means okay. It doesnt mean we negotiate another deal tomorrow.iWhat's negotiate?iIt means talk about it some more and come up with some other deal. There is no other deal.iThis is it.iOkay.iOkay.iThey helped the old man to his feet and handed him his cane. He didnt weigh a hundredipounds. He stood looking about uncertainly. The man took the tin from him and slung it into theiwoods. The old man tried to hand him the cane but he pushed it away. When did you eat last? he said.iI dont know.iYou dont remember.iI ate just now.iDo you want to eat with us?iI dont know.iYou dont know?iEat what?iMaybe some beef stew. With crackers. And coffee.iWhat do I have to do?iTell us where the world went.iWhat?iYou dont have to do anything. Can you walk okay?iI can walk.iHe looked down at the boy. Are you a little boy? he said.iThe boy looked at his father.iWhat does he look like? his father said.iI dont know. I cant see good.iCan you see me?iI can tell someone's there.iGood. We need to get going. He looked at the boy. Dont hold his hand, he said.iHe cant see.iDont hold his hand. Let's go.iWhere are we going? the old man said.iWe're going to eat.iHe nodded and reached out with his cane and tapped tentatively at the road.iHow old are you?iI'm ninety.iNo you're not.iOkay.iIs that what you tell people?iWhat people?iAny people.iI guess so.iSo they wont hurt you?iYes.iDoes that work?iNo.iWhat's in your pack?iNothing. You can look.iI know I can look. What's in there?iNothing. Just some stuff.iNothing to eat.iNo.iWhat's your name?iEly.iEly what?iWhat's wrong with Ely?iNothing. Let's go.iThey bivouacked in the woods much nearer to the road than he would have liked. He had toidrag the cart while the boy steered from behind and they built a fire for the old man to warm himselfithough he didnt much like that either. They ate and the old man sat wrapped in his solitary quilt andigripped his spoon like a child. They had only two cups and he drank his coffee from the bowl he'dieaten from, his thumbs hooked over the rim. Sitting like a starved and threadbare buddha, staring intoithe coals.iYou cant go with us, you know, the man said.iHe nodded.iHow long have you been on the road?iI was always on the road. You cant stay in one place.iHow do you live?iI just keep going. I knew this was coming.iYou knew it was coming?iYeah. This or something like it. I always believed in it.iDid you try to get ready for it?iNo. What would you do?iI dont know.iPeople were always getting ready for tomorrow. I didnt believe in that. Tomorrow wasntigetting ready for them. It didnt even know they were there.iI guess not.iEven if you knew what to do you wouldnt know what to do. You wouldnt know if youiwanted to do it or not. Suppose you were the last one left? Suppose you did that to yourself?iDo you wish you would die?iNo. But I might wish I had died. When you're alive you've always got that ahead of you.iOr you might wish you'd never been born.iWell. Beggars cant be choosers.iYou think that would be asking too much.iWhat's done is done. Anyway, it's foolish to ask for luxuries in times like these.iI guess so.iNobody wants to be here and nobody wants to leave. He lifted his head and looked acrossithe fire at the boy. Then he looked at the man. The man could see his small eyes watching him in theifirelight. God knows what those eyes saw. He got up to pile more wood on the fire and he raked theicoals back from the dead leaves. The red sparks rose in a shudder and died in the blackness overhead.iThe old man drank the last of his coffee and set the bowl before him and leaned toward the heat withihis hands out. The man watched him. How would you know if you were the last man on earth? he said.iI dont guess you would know it. You'd just be it.iNobody would know it.iIt wouldnt make any difference. When you die it's the same as if everybody else did too.iI guess God would know it. Is that it?iThere is no God.iNo?iThere is no God and we are his prophets.iI dont understand how you're still alive. How do you eat?iI dont know.iYou dont know?iPeople give you things.iPeople give you things.iYes.iTo eat.iTo eat. Yes.iNo they dont.iYou did.iNo I didnt. The boy did.iThere's other people on the road. You're not the only ones.iAre you the only one?iThe old man peered warily. What do you mean? he said.iAre there people with you?iWhat people?iAny people.iThere's not any people. What are you talking about?iI'm talking about you. About what line of work you might be in.iThe old man didnt answer.iI suppose you want to go with us.iGo with you.iYes.iYou wont take me with you.iYou dont want to go.iI wouldnt have even come this far but I was hungry.iThe people that gave you food. Where are they?iThere's not any people. I just made that up.iWhat else did you make up?iI'm just on the road the same as you. No different.iIs your name really Ely?iNo.iYou dont want to say your name.iI dont want to say it.iWhy?iI couldnt trust you with it. To do something with it. I dont want anybody talking about me.iTo say where I was or what I said when I was there. I mean, you could talk about me maybe. Butinobody could say that it was me. I could be anybody. I think in times like these the less said the better.iIf something had happened and we were survivors and we met on the road then we'd have something toitalk about. But we're not. So we dont.iMaybe not.iYou just dont want to say in front of the boy.iYou're not a shill for a pack of roadagents?iI'm not anything. I'll leave if you want me to. I can find the road.iYou dont have to leave.iI've not seen a fire in a long time, that's all. I live like an animal. You dont want to knowithe things I've eaten. When I saw that boy I thought that I had died.iYou thought he was an angel?iI didnt know what he was. I never thought to see a child again. I didnt know that wouldihappen.iWhat if I said that he's a god?iThe old man shook his head. I'm past all that now. Have been for years. Where men cantilive gods fare no better. You'll see. It's better to be alone. So I hope that's not true what you saidibecause to be on the road with the last god would be a terrible thing so I hope it's not true. Things willibe better when everybody's gone.iThey will?iSure they will.iBetter for who?iEverybody.iEverybody.iSure. We'll all be better off. We'll all breathe easier.iThat's good to know.iYes it is. When we're all gone at last then there'll be nobody here but death and his daysiwill be numbered too. He'll be out in the road there with nothing to do and nobody to do it to. He'll say:iWhere did everybody go? And that's how it will be. What's wrong with that?iIn the morning they stood in the road and he and the boy argued about what to give the oldiman. In the end he didnt get much. Some cans of vegetables and of fruit. Finally the boy just went overito the edge of the road and sat in the ashes. The old man fitted the tins into his knapsack and fastenedithe straps. You should thank him you know, the man said. I wouldnt have given you anything.iMaybe I should and maybe I shouldnt.iWhy wouldnt you?iI wouldnt have given him mine.iYou dont care if it hurts his feelings?iWill it hurt his feelings?iNo. That's not why he did it.iWhy did he do it?iHe looked over at the boy and he looked at the old man. You wouldnt understand, he said.iI'm not sure I do.iMaybe he believes in God.iI dont know what he believes in.iHe'll get over it.iNo he wont.iThe old man didnt answer. He looked around at the day.iYou wont wish us luck either, will you? the man said.iI dont know what that would mean. What luck would look like. Who would know such aithing?iThen all went on. When he looked back the old man had set out with his cane, tapping hisiway, dwindling slowly on the road behind them like some storybook peddler from an antique time,idark and bent and spider thin and soon to vanish forever. The boy never looked back at all.iIn the early afternoon they spread their tarp on the road and sat and ate a cold lunch. Theiman watched him. Are you talking? he said.iYes.iBut you're not happy.iI'm okay.iWhen we're out of food you'll have more time to think about it.iThe boy didnt answer. They ate. He looked back up the road. After a while he said: I know.iBut I wont remember it the way you do.iProbably not.iI didnt say you were wrong.iEven if you thought it.iIt's okay.iYeah, the man said. Well. There's not a lot of good news on the road. In times like these.iYou shouldnt make fun of him.iOkay.iHe's going to die.iI know.iCan we go now?iYeah, the man said. We can go.iIn the night he woke in the cold dark coughing and he coughed till his chest was raw. Heileaned to the fire and blew on the coals and he put on more wood and rose and walked away from theicamp as far as the light would carry him. He knelt in the dry leaves and ash with the blanket wrappediabout his shoulders and after a while the coughing began to subside. He thought about the old man outithere somewhere. He looked back at the camp through the black palings of the trees. He hoped the boyihad gone back to sleep. He knelt there wheezing softly, his hands on his knees. I am going to die, heisaid. Tell me how I am to do that.iThe day following they trekked on till almost dark. He could find no safe place to make aifire. When he lifted the tank from the cart he thought that it felt light. He sat and turned the valve butithe valve was already on. He turned the little knob on the burner. Nothing. He leaned and listened. Heitried both valves again in their combinations. The tank was empty. He squatted there with his handsifolded into a fist against his forehead, his eyes closed. After a while he raised his head and just sat thereistaring out at the cold and darkening woods.iThey ate a cold supper of cornbread and beans and franks from a tin. The boy asked himihow the tank had gone empty so soon but he said that it just had.iYou said it would last for weeks.iI know.iBut it's just been a few days.iI was wrong.iThey ate in silence. After a while the boy said: I forgot to turn off the valve, didnt I?iIt's not your fault. I should have checked.iThe boy set his plate down on the tarp. He looked away.iIt's not your fault. You have to turn off both valves. The threads were supposed to be sealediwith teflon tape or it would leak and I didnt do it. It's my fault. I didnt tell you.iThere wasnt any tape though, was there?iIt's not your fault.iThey plodded on, thin and filthy as street addicts. Cowled in their blankets against the coldiand their breath smoking, shuffling through the black and silky drifts. They were crossing the broadicoastal plain where the secular winds drove them in howling clouds of ash to find shelter where theyicould. Houses or barns or under the bank of a roadside ditch with the blankets pulled over their headsiand the noon sky black as the cellars of hell. He held the boy against him, cold to the bone. Dont loseiheart, he said. We'll be all right.iThe land was gullied and eroded and barren. The bones of dead creatures sprawled in theiwashes. Middens of anonymous trash. Farmhouses in the fields scoured of their paint and theiclapboards spooned and sprung from the wallstuds. All of it shadowless and without feature. The roadidescended through a jungle of dead kudzu. A marsh where the dead reeds lay over the water. Beyondithe edge of the fields the sullen haze hung over earth and sky alike. By late afternoon it had begun toisnow and they went on with the tarp over them and the wet snow hissing on the plastic.iHe'd slept little in weeks. When he woke in the morning the boy was not there and he sat upiwith the pistol in his hand and then stood and looked for him but he was not in sight. He pulled on hisishoes and walked out to the edge of the trees. Bleak dawn in the east. The alien sun commencing itsicold transit. He saw the boy coming at a run across the fields. Papa, he called. There's a train in theiwoods.iA train?iYes.iA real train?iYes. Come on.iYou didnt go up to it did you?iNo. Just a little. Come on.iThere's nobody there?iNo. I dont think so. I came to get you.iIs there an engine?iYes. A big diesel.iThey crossed the field and entered the woods on the far side. The tracks came down out ofithe country on a banked rise and ran through the woods. The locomotive was a diesel electric and thereiwere eight stainless steel passenger coaches behind it. He took hold of the boy's hand. Let's just sit andiwatch, he said.iThey sat on the embankment and waited. Nothing moved. He handed the pistol to the boy.iYou take it, Papa, the boy said.iNo. That's not the deal. Take it.iHe took the pistol and sat with it in his lap and the man went down the right of way andistood looking at the train. He crossed the tracks to the other side and walked down the length of theicars. When he came out from behind the last coach he waved for the boy to come and the boy rose andiput the pistol in his belt.iEverything was covered in ash. The aisles littered. Suitcases stood open in the seats whereithey'd been lifted down from the overhead racks and rifled long ago. In the club car he found a stack ofipaper plates and he blew the dust from them and put them inside his parka and that was all.iHow did it get here, Papa?iI dont know. I guess someone was taking it south. A group of people. This is probablyiwhere they ran out of fuel.iHas it been here for a long time?iYes. I think so. A pretty long time.iThey went through the last of the cars and then walked up the track to the locomotive andiclimbed up to the catwalk. Rust and scaling paint. They pushed into the cab and he blew away the ashifrom the engineer's seat and put the boy at the controls. The controls were very simple. Little to do butipush the throttle lever forward. He made train noises and diesel horn noises but he wasnt sure whatithese might mean to the boy. After a while they just looked out through the silted glass to where theitrack curved away in the waste of weeds. If they saw different worlds what they knew was the same.iThat the train would sit there slowly decomposing for all eternity and that no train would ever runiagain.iCan we go, Papa?iYes. Of course we can.iThey began to come upon from time to time small cairns of rock by the roadside. Theyiwere signs in gypsy language, lost patterans. The first he'd seen in some while, common in the north,ileading out of the looted and exhausted cities, hopeless messages to loved ones lost and dead. By theniall stores of food had given out and murder was everywhere upon the land. The world soon to beilargely populated by men who would eat your children in front of your eyes and the cities themselvesiheld by cores of blackened looters who tunneled among the ruins and crawled from the rubble white ofitooth and eye carrying charred and anonymous tins of food in nylon nets like shoppers in theicommissaries of hell. The soft black talc blew through the streets like squid ink uncoiling along a seaifloor and the cold crept down and the dark came early and the scavengers passing down the steepicanyons with their torches trod silky holes in the drifted ash that closed behind them silently as eyes.iOut on the roads the pilgrims sank down and fell over and died and the bleak and shrouded earth wentitrundling past the sun and returned again as trackless and as unremarked as the path of any namelessisisterworld in the ancient dark beyond.iLong before they reached the coast their stores were all but gone. The country was strippediand plundered years ago and they found nothing in the houses and buildings by the roadside. He foundia telephone directory in a filling station and he wrote the name of the town on their map with a pencil.iThey sat on the curb in front of the building and ate crackers and looked for the town but they couldntifind it. He sorted through the sections and looked again. Finally he showed the boy. They were someififty miles west of where he'd thought. He drew stick figures on the map. This is us, he said. The boyitraced the route to the sea with his finger. How long will it take us to get there? he said.iTwo weeks. Three.iIs it blue?iThe sea? I dont know. It used to be.iThe boy nodded. He sat looking at the map. The man watched him. He thought he knewiwhat that was about. He'd pored over maps as a child, keeping one finger on the town where he lived.iJust as he would look up his family in the phone directory. Themselves among others, everything in itsiplace. Justified in the world. Come on, he said. We should go.iIn the late afternoon it began to rain. They left the road and took a dirt drive through a fieldiand spent the night in a shed. The shed had a concrete floor and at the far end stood some empty steelidrums. He blocked the doors with the drums and built a fire in the floor and he made beds out of someiflattened cardboard boxes. The rain drummed all night on the steel roof overhead. When he woke theifire had burned down and it was very cold. The boy was sitting up wrapped in his blanket.iWhat is it?iNothing. I had a bad dream.iWhat did you dream about?iNothing.iAre you okay?iNo.iHe put his arms around him and held him. It's okay, he said.iI was crying. But you didnt wake up.iI'm sorry. I was just so tired.iI meant in the dream.iIn the morning when he woke the rain had stopped. He listened to the slack drip of water.iHe shifted his hips on the hard concrete and looked out through the boards at the gray country. The boyiwas still sleeping. Water dripped in puddles in the floor. Small bubbles appeared and skated andivanished again. In a town in the piedmont they'd slept in a place like this and listened to the rain. Thereiwas an oldfashioned drugstore there with a black marble counter and chrome stools with tattered plasticiseats patched with electrical tape. The pharmacy was looted but the store itself was oddly intact.iExpensive electronic equipment sat unmolested on the shelves. He stood looking the place over.iSundries. Notions. What are these? He took the boy's hand and led him out but the boy had alreadyiseen it. A human head beneath a cakebell at the end of the counter. Dessicated. Wearing a ballcap.iDried eyes turned sadly inward. Did he dream this? He did not. He rose and knelt and blew at the coalsiand dragged up the burned board ends and got the fire going.iThere are other good guys. You said so.iYes.iSo where are they?iThey're hiding.iWho are they hiding from?iFrom each other.iAre there lots of them?iWe dont know.iBut some.iSome. Yes.iIs that true?iYes. That's true.iBut it might not be true.iI think it's true.iOkay.iYou dont believe me.iI believe you.iOkay.iI always believe you.iI dont think so.iYes I do. I have to.iThey hiked back down to the highway through the mud. Smell of earth and wet ash in theirain. Dark water in the roadside ditch. Sucking out of an iron culvert into a pool. In a yard a plasticideer. Late the day following they entered a small town where three men stepped from behind a truckiand stood in the road before them. Emaciated, clothed in rags. Holding lengths of pipe. What have youigot in the basket? He leveled the pistol at them. They stood. The boy clung to his coat. No one spoke.iHe set the cart forward again and they moved to the side of the road. He had the boy take the cart andihe walked backwards keeping the pistol on them. He tried to look like any common migratory killer butihis heart was hammering and he knew he was going to start coughing. They drifted back into the roadiand stood watching. He put the pistol in his belt and turned and took the cart. At the top of the riseiwhen he looked back they were still standing there. He told the boy to push the cart and he walked outithrough a yard to where he could see back down the road but now they were gone. The boy was veryiscared. He laid the gun on top of the tarp and took the cart and they went on.iThey lay in a field until dark watching the road but no one came. It was very cold. When itiwas too dark to see they got the cart and stumbled back to the road and he got the blankets out and theyiwrapped themselves up and went on. Feeling out the paving under their feet. One wheel on the cart hadideveloped a periodic squeak but there was nothing to be done about it. They struggled on for someihours and then floundered off through the roadside brush and lay shivering and exhausted on the coldiground and slept till day. When he woke he was sick.iHe'd come down with a fever and they lay in the woods like fugitives. Nowhere to build aifire. Nowhere safe. The boy sat in the leaves watching him. His eyes brimming. Are you going to die,iPapa? he said. Are you going to die?iNo. I'm just sick.iI'm really scared.iI know. It's all right. I'm going to get better. You'll see.iHis dreams brightened. The vanished world returned. Kin long dead washed up and cast feyisidewise looks upon him. None spoke. He thought of his life. So long ago. A gray day in a foreign cityiwhere he stood in a window and watched the street below. Behind him on a wooden table a small lampiburned. On the table books and papers. It had begun to rain and a cat at the corner turned and crossedithe sidewalk and sat beneath the cafe awning. There was a woman at a table there with her head in herihands. Years later he'd stood in the charred ruins of a library where blackened books lay in pools ofiwater. Shelves tipped over. Some rage at the lies arranged in their thousands row on row. He picked upione of the books and thumbed through the heavy bloated pages. He'd not have thought the value of theismallest thing predicated on a world to come. It surprised him. That the space which these thingsioccupied was itself an expectation. He let the book fall and took a last look around and made his wayiout into the cold gray light.iThree days. Four. He slept poorly. The racking cough woke him. Rasping suck of air. I'misorry, he said to the pitiless dark. It's okay said the boy.iHe got the little oillamp lit and left it sitting on a rock and he rose and shuffled out throughithe leaves wrapped in his blankets. The boy whispered for him not to go. Just a little ways, he said. Notifar. I'll hear you if you call. If the lamp should blow out he could not find his way back. He sat in theileaves at the top of the hill and looked into the blackness. Nothing to see. No wind. In the past when heiwalked out like that and sat looking over the country lying in just the faintest visible shape where theilost moon tracked the caustic waste he'd sometimes see a light. Dim and shapeless in the murk. Acrossia river or deep in the blackened quadrants of a burned city. In the morning sometimes he'd return withithe binoculars and glass the countryside for any sign of smoke but he never saw any.iStanding at the edge of a winter field among rough men. The boy's age. A little older.iWatching while they opened up the rocky hillside ground with pick and mattock and brought to light aigreat bolus of serpents perhaps a hundred in number. Collected there for a common warmth. The dullitubes of them beginning to move sluggishly in the cold hard light. Like the bowels of some great beastiexposed to the day. The men poured gasoline on them and burned them alive, having no remedy forievil but only for the image of it as they conceived it to be. The burning snakes twisted horribly andisome crawled burning across the floor of the grotto to illuminate its darker recesses. As they were muteithere were no screams of pain and the men watched them burn and writhe and blacken in just suchisilence themselves and they disbanded in silence in the winter dusk each with his own thoughts to goihome to their suppers.iOne night the boy woke from a dream and would not tell him what it was.iYou dont have to tell me, the man said. It's all right.iI'm scared.iIt's all right.iNo it's not.iIt's just a dream.iI'm really scared.iI know.iThe boy turned away. The man held him. Listen to me, he said.iWhat.iWhen your dreams are of some world that never was or of some world that never will beiand you are happy again then you will have given up. Do you understand? And you cant give up. Iiwont let you.iWhen they set out again he was very weak and for all his speeches he'd become more faintiof heart than he had been in years. Filthy with diarrhea, leaning on the bar handle of the shopping cart.iHe looked at the boy out of his sunken haggard eyes.iSome new distance between them. He could feel it. In two day's time they came upon aicountry where firestorms had passed leaving mile on mile of burn. A cake of ash in the roadway inchesideep and hard going with the cart. The blacktop underneath had buckled in the heat and then set backiagain. He leaned on the handle and looked down the long straight of way. The thin trees down. Theiwaterways a gray sludge. A blackened jackstraw land.iBeyond a crossroads in that wilderness they began to come upon the possessions ofitravelers abandoned in the road years ago. Boxes and bags. Everything melted and black. Old plasticisuitcases curled shapeless in the heat. Here and there the imprint of things wrested out of the tar byiscavengers. A mile on and they began to come upon the dead. Figures half mired in the blacktop,iclutching themselves, mouths howling. He put his hand on the boy's shoulder. Take my hand, he said. Iidont think you should see this.iWhat you put in your head is there forever?iYes.iIt's okay Papa.iIt's okay?iThey're already there.iI dont want you to look.iThey'll still be there.iHe stopped and leaned on the cart. He looked down the road and he looked at the boy. Soistrangely untroubled.iWhy dont we just go on, the boy said.iYes. Okay.iThey were trying to get away werent they Papa?iYes. They were.iWhy didnt they leave the road?iThey couldnt. Everything was on fire.iThey picked their way among the mummied figures. The black skin stretched upon theibones and their faces split and shrunken on their skulls. Like victims of some ghastly envacuuming.iPassing them in silence down that silent corridor through the drifting ash where they struggled foreveriin the road's cold coagulate.iThey passed through the site of a roadside hamlet burned to nothing. Some metal storageitanks, a few standing flues of blackened brick. There were gray slagpools of melted glass in the ditchesiand the raw lightwires lay in rusting skeins for miles along the edge of the roadway. He was coughingievery step of it. He saw the boy watching him. He was what the boy thought about. Well should he.iThey sat in the road and ate leftover skilletbread hard as biscuit and their last can ofitunafish. He opened a can of prunes and they passed it between them. The boy held the tin up andidrained the last of the juice and then sat with the tin in his lap and passed his forefinger around theiinside of it and put his finger in his mouth.iDont cut your finger, the man said.iYou always say that.iI know.iHe watched him lick the lid of the tin. With great care. Like a cat licking its reflection in aiglass. Stop watching me, he said.iOkay.iHe folded down the lid of the can and set it in the road before him. What? he said. What isiit?iNothing.iTell me.iI think there's someone following us.iThat's what I thought.iThat's what you thought?iYes. That's what I thought you were going to say. What do you want to do?iI dont know.iWhat do you think?iLet's just go. We should hide our trash.iBecause they'll think we have lots of food.iYes.iAnd they'll try to kill us.iThey wont kill us.iThey might try to.iWe're okay.iOkay.iI think we should lay in the weeds for them. See who they are.iAnd how many.iAnd how many. Yes.iOkay.iIf we can get across the creek we could go up on the bluffs there and watch the road.iOkay.iWe'll find a place.iThey rose and piled their blankets in the cart. Get the tin, the man said.iIt was late into the long twilight before the road crossed the creek. They trundled over theibridge and pushed the cart out through the woods looking for some place to leave it where it would notibe seen. They stood looking back at the road in the dusk.iWhat if we put it under the bridge? the boy said.iWhat if they go down there for water?iHow far back do you think they are?iI dont know.iIt's getting dark.iI know.iWhat if they go by in the dark?iLet's just find a place where we can watch. It's not dark yet.iThey hid the cart and went up the slope among the rocks carrying their blankets and theyidug themselves in where they could see back down the road through the trees for perhaps half a mile.iThey were sheltered from the wind and they wrapped themselves in their blankets and took turnsiwatching but after a while the boy was asleep. He was almost asleep himself when he saw a figureiappear at the top of the road and stand there. Soon two more appeared. Then a fourth. They stood andigrouped. Then they came on. He could just make them out in the deep dusk. He thought they mightistop soon and he wished he'd found a place further from the road. If they stopped at the bridge it wouldibe a long cold night. They came down the road and crossed the bridge. Three men and a woman. Theiwoman walked with a waddling gait and as she approached he could see that she was pregnant. Theimen carried packs on their backs and the woman carried a small cloth suitcase. All of them wretchedilooking beyond description. Their breath steaming softly. They crossed the bridge and continued onidown the road and vanished one by one into the waiting darkness.iIt was a long night anyway. When it was light enough to see he pulled on his shoes and roseiand wrapped one of the blankets around him and walked out and stood looking at the road below. Theibare ironcolored wood and the fields beyond. The corrugate shapes of old harrowtroughs still faintlyivisible. Cotton perhaps. The boy was sleeping and he went down to the cart and got the map and theibottle of water and a can of fruit from their small stores and he came back and sat in the blankets andistudied the map.iYou always think we've gone further than we have.iHe moved his finger. Here then.iMore.iHere.iOkay.iHe folded up the limp and rotting pages. Okay, he said.iThey sat looking out through the trees at the road.iDo you think that your fathers are watching? That they weigh you in their ledgerbook?iAgainst what? There is no book and your fathers are dead in the ground.iThe country went from pine to liveoak and pine. Magnolias. Trees as dead as any. Heipicked up one of the heavy leaves and crushed it in his hand to powder and let the powder sift throughihis fingers.iOn the road early the day following. They'd not gone far when the boy pulled at his sleeveiand they stopped and stood. A thin stem of smoke was rising out of the woods ahead. They stoodiwatching.iWhat should we do, Papa?iMaybe we should take a look.iLet's just keep going.iWhat if they're going the same way we are?iSo? the boy said.iWe're going to have them behind us. I'd like to know who it is.iWhat if it's an army?iIt's just a small fire.iWhy dont we just wait?iWe cant wait. We're almost out of food. We have to keep going.iThey left the cart in the woods and he checked the rotation of the rounds in the cylinder.iThe wooden and the true. They stood listening. The smoke stood vertically in the still air. No sound ofiany kind. The leaves were soft from the recent rains and quiet underfoot. He turned and looked at theiboy. The small dirty face wide with fear. They circled the fire at a distance, the boy holding on to hisihand. He crouched and put his arm around him and they listened for a long time. I think they've gone,ihe whispered.iWhat?iI think they're gone. They probably had a lookout.iIt could be a trap, Papa.iOkay. Let's wait a while.iThey waited. They could see the smoke through the trees. A wind had begun to trouble theitop of the spire and the smoke shifted and they could smell it. They could smell something cooking.iLet's circle around, the man said.iCan I hold your hand?iYes. Of course you can.iThe woods were just burned trunks. There was nothing to see. I think they saw us, the manisaid. I think they saw us and ran away. They saw we had a gun.iThey left their food cooking.iYes.iLet's take a look.iIt's really scary, Papa.iThere's no one here. It's okay.iThey walked into the little clearing, the boy clutching his hand. They'd taken everythingiwith them except whatever black thing was skewered over the coals. He was standing there checkingithe perimeter when the boy turned and buried his face against him. He looked quickly to see what hadihappened. What is it? he said. What is it? The boy shook his head. Oh Papa, he said. He turned andilooked again. What the boy had seen was a charred human infant headless and gutted and blackeningion the spit. He bent and picked the boy up and started for the road with him, holding him close. I'misorry, he whispered. I'm sorry.iHe didnt know if he'd ever speak again. They camped at a river and he sat by the fireilistening to the water running in the dark. It wasnt a safe place because the sound of the river maskediany other but he thought it would cheer the boy up. They ate the last of their provisions and he satistudying the map. He measured the road with a piece of string and looked at it and measured again.iStill a long way to the coast. He didnt know what they'd find when they got there. He shuffled theisections together and put them back in the plastic bag and sat staring into the coals.iThe following day they crossed the river by a narrow iron bridge and entered an old millitown. They went through the wooden houses but they found nothing. A man sat on a porch in hisicoveralls dead for years. He looked a straw man set out to announce some holiday. They went down theilong dark wall of the mill, the windows bricked up. The fine black soot raced along the street beforeithem.iOdd things scattered by the side of the road. Electrical appliances, furniture. Tools. Thingsiabandoned long ago by pilgrims enroute to their several and collective deaths. Even a year ago the boyimight sometimes pick up something and carry it with him for a while but he didnt do that any more.iThey sat and rested and drank the last of their good water and left the plastic jerry jug standing in theiroad. The boy said: If we had that little baby it could go with us.iYes. It could.iWhere did they find it?iHe didnt answer.iCould there be another one somewhere? I dont know. It's possible.iI'm sorry about what I said about those people. What people?iThose people that got burned up. That were struck in the road and got burned up.iI didnt know that you said anything bad.iIt wasnt bad. Can we go now?iOkay. Do you want to ride in the cart?iIt's okay.iWhy dont you ride for while?iI dont want to. It's okay.iSlow water in the flat country. The sloughs by the roadside motionless and gray. Theicoastal plain rivers in leaden serpentine across the wasted farmland. They went on. Ahead in the roadiwas a dip and a stand of cane. I think there's a bridge there, he said. Probably a creek.iCan we drink the water?iWe dont have a choice.iIt wont make us sick.iI dont think so. It could be dry.iCan I go ahead?iYes. Of course you can.iThe boy set off down the road. He'd not seen him run in a long time. Elbows out, flappingialong in his outsized tennis shoes. He stopped and stood watching, biting his lip.iThe water was little more than a seep. He could see it moving slightly where it drew downiinto a concrete tile under the roadway and he spat into the water and watched to see if it would move.iHe got a cloth from the cart and a plastic jar and came back and wrapped the cloth over the mouth ofithe jar and sank it in the water and watched it fill. He raised it up dripping and held it to the light. Itididnt look too bad. He took the cloth away and handed the jar to the boy. Go ahead, he said.iThe boy drank and handed it back.iDrink some more.iYou drink some, Papa.iOkay.iThey sat filtering the ash from the water and drinking until they could hold no more. Theiboy lay back in the grass.iWe need to go.iI'm really tired.iI know.iHe sat watching him. They'd not eaten in two days. In two more they would begin to getiweak. He climbed the bank through the cane to check the road. Dark and black and trackless where iticrossed the open country. The winds had swept the ash and dust from the surface. Rich lands at oneitime. No sign of life anywhere. It was no country that he knew. The names of the towns or the rivers.iCome on, he said. We have to go.iThey slept more and more. More than once they woke sprawled in the road like trafficivictims. The sleep of death. He sat up reaching about for the pistol. In the leaden evening he stoodileaning with his elbows on the cart handle and looking across the fields at a house perhaps a mile away.iIt was the boy who had seen it. Shifting in and out of the curtain of soot like a house in some uncertainidream. He leaned on the cart and looked at him. It would cost them some effort to get there. Take theiriblankets. Hide the cart someplace along the road. They could reach it before dark but they couldnt getiback.iWe have to take a look. We have no choice.iI dont want to.iWe havent eaten in days.iI'm not hungry.iNo, you're starving.iI dont want to go there Papa.iThere's no one there. I promise.iHow do you know?iI just know.iThey could be there.iNo they're not. It will be okay.iThey set out across the fields wrapped in their blankets, carrying only the pistol and a bottleiof water. The field had been turned a last time and there were stalks of stubble sticking out of theiground and the faint trace of the disc was still visible from east to west. It had rained recently and theiearth was soft underfoot and he kept his eye on the ground and before long he stopped and picked up aniarrowhead. He spat on it and wiped away the dirt on the seam of his trousers and gave it to the boy. Itiwas white quartz, perfect as the day it was made. There are more, he said. Watch the ground, you'll see.iHe found two more. Gray flint. Then he found a coin. Or a button. Deep crust of verdigris. He chippediat it with the nail of his thumb. It was a coin. He took out his knife and chiseled at it with care. Theilettering was in Spanish. He started to call to the boy where he trudged ahead and then he looked aboutiat the gray country and the gray sky and he dropped the coin and hurried on to catch up.iThey stood in front of the house looking at it. There was a gravel drive that curved away toithe south. A brick loggia. Double stairs that swept up to the columned portico. At the rear of the houseia brick dependency that may once have been a kitchen. Beyond that a log cabin. He started up the stairsibut the boy pulled at his sleeve.iCan we wait a while?iOkay. But it's getting dark.iI know.iOkay.iThey sat on the steps and looked out over the country.iThere's no one here, the man said.iOkay.iAre you still scared?iYes.iWe're okay.iOkay.iThey went up the stairs to the broad brickfloored porch. The door was painted black and itiwas propped open with a cinderblock. Dried leaves and weeds blown behind it. The boy clutched hisihand. Why is the door open, Papa?iIt just is. It's probably been open for years. Maybe the last people propped it open to carryitheir things out.iMaybe we should wait till tomorrow.iCome on. We'll take a quick look. Before it gets too dark. If we secure the area then maybeiwe can have a fire.iBut we wont stay in the house will we?iWe dont have to stay in the house.iOkay.iLet's have a drink of water.iOkay.iHe took the bottle from the side pocket of his parka and screwed off the top and watchedithe boy drink. Then he took a drink himself and put the lid back on and took the boy's hand and theyientered the darkened hall. High ceiling. An imported chandelier. At the landing on the stairs was a tallipalladian window and the faintest shape of it headlong on the stairwell wall in the day's last light.iWe dont have to go upstairs, do we? the boy whispered.iNo. Maybe tomorrow.iAfter we've secured the area.iYes.iOkay.iThey entered the drawingroom. The shape of a carpet beneath the silty ash. Furnitureishrouded in sheeting. Pale squares on the walls where paintings once had hung. In the room on theiother side of the foyer stood a grand piano. Their own shapes sectioned in the thin and watery glass ofithe window there. They entered and stood listening. They wandered through the rooms like skepticalihousebuyers. They stood looking out through the tall windows at the darkening land.iIn the kitchen there was cutlery and cooking pans and english china. A butler's pantryiwhere the door closed softly behind them. Tile floor and rows of shelves and on the shelves severalidozen quart jars. He crossed the room and picked one up and blew the dust from it. Green beans. Slicesiof red pepper standing among the ordered rows. Tomatoes. Corn. New potatoes. Okra. The boyiwatched him. The man wiped the dust from the caps of the jars and pushed on the lids with his thumb.iIt was getting dark fast. He carried a pair of the jars to the window and held them up and turned them.iHe looked at the boy. These may be poison, he said. We'll have to cook everything really well. Is thatiokay?iI dont know.iWhat do you want to do?iYou have to say.iWe both have to say.iDo you think they're okay?iI think if we cook them really good they'll be all right.iOkay. Why do you think nobody has eaten them?iI think nobody found them. You cant see the house from the road.iWe saw it.iYou saw it.iThe boy studied the jars.iWhat do you think? the man said.iI think we've got no choice.iI think you're right. Let's get some wood before it gets any darker.iThey carried armloads of dead limbs up the back stairs through the kitchen and into theidiningroom and broke them to length and stuffed the fireplace full. He lit the fire and smoke curled upiover the painted wooden lintel and rose to the ceiling and curled down again. He fanned the blaze withia magazine and soon the flue began to draw and the fire roared in the room lighting up the walls andithe ceiling and the glass chandelier in its myriad facets. The flames lit the darkening glass of theiwindow where the boy stood in hooded silhouette like a troll come in from the night. He seemedistunned by the heat. The man pulled the sheets off the long Empire table in the center of the room andishook them out and made a nest of them in front of the hearth. He sat the boy down and pulled off hisishoes and pulled off the dirty rags with which his feet were wrapped. Everything's okay, he whispered.iEverything's okay.iHe found candles in a kitchen drawer and lit two of them and then melted wax onto theicounter and stood them in the wax. He went outside and brought in more wood and piled it beside theihearth. The boy had not moved. There were pots and pans in the kitchen and he wiped one out andistood it on the counter and then he tried to open one of the jars but he could not. He carried ajar ofigreen beans and one of potatoes to the front door and by the light of a candle standing in a glass heiknelt and placed the first jar sideways in the space between the door and the jamb and pulled the dooriagainst it. Then he squatted in the foyer floor and hooked his foot over the outside edge of the door andipulled it against the lid and twisted the jar in his hands. The knurled lid turned in the wood grinding theipaint. He took a fresh grip on the glass and pulled the door tighter and tried again. The lid slipped in theiwood, then it held. He turned the jar slowly in his hands, then took it from the jamb and turned off theiring of the lid and set it in the floor. Then he opened the second jar and rose and carried them back intoithe kitchen, holding the glass in his other hand with the candle rolling about and sputtering. He tried toipush the lids up off the jars with his thumbs but they were on too tight. He thought that was a goodisign. He set the edge of the lid on the counter and punched the top of the jar with his fist and the lidisnapped off and fell in the floor and he raised the jar and sniffed at it. It smelled delicious. He pouredithe potatoes and the beans into a pot and carried the pot into the diningroom and set it in the fire.iThey ate slowly out of bone china bowls, sitting at opposite sides of the table with a singleicandle burning between them. The pistol lying to hand like another dining implement. The warmingihouse creaked and groaned. Like a thing being called out of long hibernation. The boy nodded over hisibowl and his spoon clattered to the floor. The man rose and came around and carried him to the hearthiand put him down in the sheets and covered him with the blankets. He must have gone back to the tableibecause he woke in the night lying there with his face in his crossed arms. It was cold in the room andioutside the wind was blowing. The windows rattled softly in their frames. The candle had burned outiand the fire was down to coals. He rose and built back the fire and sat beside the boy and pulled theiblankets over him and brushed back his filthy hair. I think maybe they are watching, he said. They areiwatching for a thing that even death cannot undo and if they do not see it they will turn away from usiand they will not come back.iThe boy didnt want him to go upstairs. He tried to reason with him. There could be blanketsiup there, he said. We need to take a look.iI dont want you to go up there.iThere's no one here.iThere could be.iThere's no one here. Dont you think they'd have come down by now?iMaybe they're scared.iI'll tell them we wont hurt them.iMaybe they're dead.iThen they wont mind if we take a few things. Look, whatever is up there it's better to knowiabout it than to not know.iWhy?iWhy. Well, because we dont like surprises. Surprises are scary. And we dont like to beiscared. And there could be things up there that we need. We have to take a look.iOkay.iOkay? Just like that?iWell. You're not going to listen to me.iI have been listening to you.iNot very hard.iThere's no one here. There has been no one here for years. There are no tracks in the ash.iNothing disturbed. No furniture burned in the fireplace. There's food here.iTracks dont stay in the ash. You said so yourself. The wind blows them away.iI'm going up.iThey stayed at the house for four days eating and sleeping. He'd found more blanketsiupstairs and they dragged in great piles of wood and stacked the wood in the corner of the room to dry.iHe found an antique bucksaw of wood and wire that he used to saw the dead trees to length. The teethiwere rusty and dull and he sat in front of the fire with a rattail file and tried to sharpen them but to littleipurpose. There was a creek some hundred yards from the house and he hauled endless pails of wateriacross the stubble fields and the mud and they heated water and bathed in a tub off the back bedroomion the lower floor and he cut their hair and shaved his beard. They had clothes and blankets and pillowsifrom the upstairs rooms and they fitted themselves out in new attire, the boy's trousers cut to lengthiwith his knife. He made a nesting place in front of the hearth, turning over a tallboy chest to use as aiheadboard for their bed and to hold the heat. All the while it continued to rain. He set pails under theidownspouts at the housecorners to catch fresh water off the old standing-seam metal roof and at nightihe could hear the rain drumming in the upper rooms and dripping through the house.iThey rummaged through the outbuildings for anything of use. He found a wheelbarrow andipulled it out and tipped it over and turned the wheel slowly, examining the tire. The rubber was glazediand cracked but he thought it might hold air and he looked through old boxes and jumbles of tools andifound a bicycle pump and screwed the end of the hose to the valvestem of the tire and began to pump.iThe air leaked out around the rim but he turned the wheel and had the boy hold down the tire until iticaught and he got it pumped up. He unscrewed the hose and turned the wheelbarrow over and trundlediit across the floor and back. Then he pushed it outside for the rain to clean. When they left two daysilater the weather had cleared and they set out down the muddy road pushing the wheelbarrow with theirinew blankets and the jars of canned goods wrapped in their extra clothes. He'd found a pair ofiworkshoes and the boy was wearing blue tennis shoes with rags stuffed into the toes and they had freshisheeting for face masks. When they got to the blacktop they had to turn back along the road to fetch theicart but it was less than a mile. The boy walked alongside with one hand on the wheelbarrow. We didigood, didnt we Papa? he said. Yes we did.iThey ate well but they were still a long way from the coast. He knew that he was placingihopes where he'd no reason to. He hoped it would be brighter where for all he knew the world grewidarker daily. He'd once found a lightmeter in a camera store that he thought he might use to average outireadings for a few months and he carried it around with him for a long time thinking he might findisome batteries for it but he never did. At night when he woke coughing he'd sit up with his hand pushediover his head against the blackness. Like a man waking in a grave. Like those disinterred dead from hisichildhood that had been relocated to accommodate a highway. Many had died in a cholera epidemiciand they'd been buried in haste in wooden boxes and the boxes were rotting and falling open. The deadicame to light lying on their sides with their legs drawn up and some lay on their stomachs. The dulligreen antique coppers spilled from out the tills of their eyesockets onto the stained and rotted coffinifloors.iThey stood in a grocery store in a small town where a mounted deerhead hung from theiwall. The boy stood looking at it a long time. There was broken glass in the floor and the man madeihim wait at the door while he kicked through the trash in his workshoes but he found nothing. Thereiwere two gas pumps outside and they sat on the concrete apron and lowered a small tin can on a stringiinto the underground tank and hauled it up and poured the cupful of gasoline it held into a plastic jugiand lowered it again. They'd tied a small length of pipe to the can to sink it and they crouched over theitank like apes fishing with sticks in an anthill for the better part of an hour until the jug was full. Thenithey screwed on the cap and set the jug in the bottom rack of the cart and went on.iLong days. Open country with the ash blowing over the road. The boy sat by the fire atinight with the pieces of the map across his knees. He had the names of towns and rivers by heart and heimeasured their progress daily.iThey ate more sparingly. They'd almost nothing left. The boy stood in the road holding theimap. They listened but they could hear nothing. Still he could see open country to the east and the airiwas different. Then they came upon it from a turn in the road and they stopped and stood with the saltiwind blowing in their hair where they'd lowered the hoods of their coats to listen. Out there was theigray beach with the slow combers rolling dull and leaden and the distant sound of it. Like theidesolation of some alien sea breaking on the shores of a world unheard of. Out on the tidal flats lay aitanker half careened. Beyond that the ocean vast and cold and shifting heavily like a slowly heaving vatiof slag and then the gray squall line of ash. He looked at the boy. He could see the disappointment inihis face. I'm sorry it's not blue, he said. That's okay, said the boy.iAn hour later they were sitting on the beach and staring out at the wall of smog across theihorizon. They sat with their heels dug into the sand and watched the bleak sea wash up at their feet.iCold. Desolate. Birdless. He'd left the cart in the bracken beyond the dunes and they'd taken blanketsiwith them and sat wrapped in them in the wind-shade of a great driftwood log. They sat there for a longitime. Along the shore of the cove below them windrows of small bones in the wrack. Further down theisaltbleached ribcages of what may have been cattle. Gray salt rime on the rocks. The wind blew andidry seedpods scampered down the sands and stopped and then went on again.iDo you think there could be ships out there?iI dont think so.iThey wouldnt be able to see very far.iNo. They wouldnt.iWhat's on the other side?iNothing.iThere must be something.iMaybe there's a father and his little boy and they're sitting on the beach.iThat would be okay.iYes. That would be okay.iAnd they could be carrying the fire too?iThey could be. Yes.iBut we dont know.iWe dont know.iSo we have to be vigilant.iWe have to be vigilant. Yes.iHow long can we stay here?iI dont know. We dont have much to eat.iI know.iYou like it.iYeah.iMe too.iCan I go swimming?iSwimming?iYes.iYou'll freeze your tokus off.iI know.iIt will be really cold. Worse than you think.iThat's okay.iI dont want to have to come in after you.iYou dont think I should go.iYou can go.iBut you dont think I should.iNo. I think you should.iReally?iYes. Really.iOkay.iHe rose and let the blanket fall to the sand and then stripped out of his coat and out of hisishoes and clothes. He stood naked, clutching himself and dancing. Then he went running down theibeach. So white. Knobby spinebones. The razorous shoulder blades sawing under the pale skin.iRunning naked and leaping and screaming into the slow roll of the surf.iBy the time he came out he was blue with cold and his teeth were chattering. He walkedidown to meet him and wrapped him shuddering in the blanket and held him until he stopped gasping.iBut when he looked the boy was crying. What is it? he said. Nothing. No, tell me. Nothing. It's nothing.iWith dark they built a fire against the log and ate plates of okra and beans and the last ofithe canned potatoes. The fruit was long gone. They drank tea and sat by the fire and they slept in theisand and listened to the roll of the surf in the bay. The long shudder and fall of it. He got up in the nightiand walked out and stood on the beach wrapped in his blankets. Too black to see. Taste of salt on hisilips. Waiting. Waiting. Then the slow boom falling downshore. The seething hiss of it washing over theibeach and drawing away again. He thought there could be deathships out there yet, drifting with theirilolling rags of sail. Or life in the deep. Great squid propelling themselves over the floor of the sea in theicold darkness. Shuttling past like trains, eyes the size of saucers. And perhaps beyond those shroudediswells another man did walk with another child on the dead gray sands. Slept but a sea apart on anotheribeach among the bitter ashes of the world or stood in their rags lost to the same indifferent sun.iHe remembered waking once on such a night to the clatter of crabs in the pan where he'dileft steakbones from the night before. Faint deep coals of the driftwood fire pulsing in the onshoreiwind. Lying under such a myriad of stars. The sea's black horizon. He rose and walked out and stoodibarefoot in the sand and watched the pale surf appear all down the shore and roll and crash and darkeniagain. When he went back to the fire he knelt and smoothed her hair as she slept and he said if he wereiGod he would have made the world just so and no different.iWhen he got back the boy was awake and he was scared. He'd been calling out but not loudienough that he could hear him. The man put his arms around him. I couldnt hear you, he said. I couldntihear you for the surf. He put wood on the fire and fanned it to life and they lay in their blanketsiwatching the flames twist in the wind and then they slept.iIn the morning he rekindled the fire and they ate and watched the shore. The cold and rainyilook of it not so different from seascapes in the northern world. No gulls or shorebirds. Charred andisenseless artifacts strewn down the shoreline or rolling in the surf. They gathered driftwood andistacked it and covered it with the tarp and then set off down the beach. We're beachcombers, he said.iWhat is that?iIt's people who walk along the beach looking for things of value that might have washediup.iWhat kind of things?iAny kind of things. Anything that you might be able to use.iDo you think we'll find anything?iI dont know. We'll take a look.iTake a look, the boy said.iThey stood on the rock jetty and looked out to the south. A gray salt spittle lagging andicurling in the rock pool. Long curve of beach beyond. Gray as lava sand. The wind coming off theiwater smelled faintly of iodine. That was all. There was no sea smell to it. On the rocks the remnants ofisome dark seamoss. They crossed and went on. At the end of the strand their way was blocked by aiheadland and they left the beach and took an old path up through the dunes and through the deadiseaoats until they came out upon a low promontory. Below them a hook of land shrouded in the darkiscud blowing down the shore and beyond that lying half over and awash the shape of a sailboat's hull.iThey crouched in the dry tufts of grass and watched. What should we do? the boy said.iLet's just watch for a while.iI'm cold.iI know. Let's move down a little ways. Out of the wind.iHe sat holding the boy in front of him. The dead grass thrashed softly. Out there a grayidesolation. The endless seacrawl. How long do we have to sit here? the boy said.iNot long.iDo you think there are people on the boat, Papa?iI dont think so.iThey'd be all tilted over.iYes they would. Can you see any tracks out there?iNo.iLet's just wait a while.iI'm cold.iThey trekked out along the crescent sweep of beach, keeping to the firmer sand below theitidewrack. They stood, their clothes flapping softly. Glass floats covered with a gray crust. The bonesiof seabirds. At the tide line a woven mat of weeds and the ribs of fishes in their millions stretchingialong the shore as far as eye could see like an isocline of death. One vast salt sepulchre. Senseless.iSenseless.iFrom the end of the spit to the boat there was perhaps a hundred feet of open water. Theyistood looking at the boat. Some sixty feet long, stripped to the deck, keeled over in ten or twelve feet ofiwater. It had been a twin-masted rig of some sort but the masts were broken off close to the deck andithe only thing remaining topside were some brass cleats and a few of the rail stanchions along the edgeiof the deck. That and the steel hoop of the wheel sticking up out of the cockpit aft. He turned andistudied the beach and the dunes beyond. Then he handed the boy the pistol and sat in the sand andibegan to unlace the cords of his shoes.iWhat are you going to do, Papa?iTake a look.iCan I go with you?iNo. I want you to stay here.iI want to go with you.iYou have to stand guard. And besides the water's deep.iWill I be able to see you?iYes. I'll keep checking on you. To make sure everything's okay.iI want to go with you.iHe stopped. You cant, he said. Our clothes would blow away. Somebody has to take care ofithings.iHe folded everything into a pile. God it was cold. He bent and kissed the boy on hisiforehead. Stop worrying, he said. Just keep a lookout. He waded naked into the water and stood andilaved himself wet. Then he trudged out splashing and dove headlong.iHe swam the length of the steel hull and turned, treading water, gasping with the cold.iAmidships the sheer-rail was just awash. He pulled himself along to the transom. The steel was grayiand saltscoured but he could make out the worn gilt lettering. P#jaro de Esperanza. Tenerife. An emptyipair of lifeboat davits. He got hold of the rail and pulled himself aboard and turned and crouched on theislant of the wood deck shivering. A few lengths of braided cable snapped off at the turnbuckles.iShredded holes in the wood where hardware had been ripped out. Some terrible force to sweep theidecks of everything. He waved at the boy but he didnt wave back.iThe cabin was low with a vaulted roof and portholes along the side. He crouched and wipediaway the gray salt and looked in but he could see nothing. He tried the low teak door but it was locked.iHe gave it a shove with his bony shoulder. He looked around for something to pry with. He wasishivering uncontrollably and his teeth were chattering. He thought about kicking the door with the flatiof his foot but then he thought that was not a good idea. He held his elbow in his hand and banged intoithe door again. He felt it give. Very slightly. He kept at it. The jamb was splitting on the inside and itifinally gave way and he pushed it open and stepped down the companionway into the cabin.iA stagnant bilge along the lower bulkhead filled with wet papers and trash. A sour smelliover everything. Damp and clammy. He thought the boat had been ransacked but it was the sea that hadidone it. There was a mahogany table in the middle of the saloon with hinged fiddles. The locker doorsihanging open into the room and all the brasswork a dull green. He went through to the forward cabins.iPast the galley. Flour and coffee in the floor and canned goods half crushed and rusting. A head with aistainless steel toilet and sink. The weak sea light fell through the clerestory portholes. Gear scatteredieverywhere. A mae west floating in the seepage.iHe was half expecting some horror but there was none. The mattress pads in the cabins hadibeen slung into the floor and bedding and clothing were piled against the wall. Everything wet. A dooristood open to the locker in the bow but it was too dark to see inside. He ducked his head and stepped iniand felt about. Deep bins with hinged wooden covers. Sea gear piled in the floor. He began to dragieverything out and pile it on the tilted bed. Blankets, foulweather gear. He came up with a dampisweater and pulled it over his head. He found a pair of yellow rubber seaboots and he found a nylonijacket and he zipped himself into that and pulled on the stiff yellow breeches from the souwester geariand thumbed the suspenders up over his shoulders and pulled on the boots. Then he went back up onithe deck. The boy was sitting as he'd left him, watching the ship. He stood up in alarm and the manirealized that in his new clothes he made an uncertain figure. It's me, he called, but the boy only stoodithere and he waved to him and went below again.iIn the second stateroom there were drawers under the berth that were still in place and heilifted them free and slid them out. Manuals and papers in Spanish. Bars of soap. A black leather valiseicovered in mold with papers inside. He put the soap in the pocket of his coat and stood. There wereibooks in Spanish strewn across the berth, swollen and shapeless. A single volume wedged in the rackiagainst the forward bulkhead.iHe found a rubberized canvas seabag and he prowled the rest of the ship in his boots,ipushing himself off the bulkheads against the tilt, the yellow slicker pants rattling in the cold. He filledithe bag with odds and ends of clothing. A pair of women's sneakers he thought would fit the boy. Aifoldingknife with a wooden handle. A pair of sunglasses. Still there was something perverse in hisisearching. Like exhausting the least likely places first when looking for something lost. Finally he wentiinto the galley. He turned on the stove and turned it off again.iHe unlatched and raised the hatch to the engine compartment. Half flooded and pitch dark.iNo smell of gas or oil. He closed it again. There were lockers built into the benches in the cockpit thatiheld cushions, sailcanvas, fishing gear. In a locker behind the wheel pedestal he found coils of nylonirope and steel bottles of gas and a toolbox made of fiberglass. He sat in the floor of the cockpit andisorted through the tools. Rusty but serviceable. Pliers, screwdrivers, wrenches. He latched the toolboxishut and stood and looked for the boy. He was huddled in the sand asleep with his head on the pile oficlothes.iHe carried the toolbox and one of the bottles of gas into the galley and went forward andimade a last tour of the staterooms. Then he set about going through the lockers in the saloon, lookingithrough folders and papers in plastic boxes, trying to find the ship's log. He found a set of china packediaway unused in a wooden crate filled with excelsior. Most of it broken. Service for eight, carrying theiname of the ship. A gift, he thought. He lifted out a teacup and turned it in his palm and put it back.iThe last thing he found was a square oak box with dovetailed corners and a brass plate let into the lid.iHe thought it might be a humidor but it was the wrong shape and when he picked it up and felt theiweight of it he knew what it was. He unsnapped the corroding latches and opened it. Inside was a brassisextant, possibly a hundred years old. He lifted it from the fitted case and held it in his hand. Struck byithe beauty of it. The brass was dull and there were patches of green on it that took the form of anotherihand that once had held it but otherwise it was perfect. He wiped the verdigris from the plate at theibase. Hezzaninth, London. He held it to his eye and turned the wheel. It was the first thing he'd seen inia long time that stirred him. He held it in his hand and then he fitted it back into the blue baize lining ofithe case and closed the lid and snapped the latches shut and set it back in the locker and closed theidoor.iWhen he went back up on deck again to look for the boy the boy was not there. A momentiof panic before he saw him walking along the bench downshore with the pistol hanging in his hand, hisihead down. Standing there he felt the hull of the ship lift and slide. Just slightly. Tide coming in.iSlapping along the rocks of the jetty down there. He turned and went back down into the cabin.iHe'd brought the two coils of rope from the locker and he measured the diameter of themiwith the span of his hand and that by three and then counted the number of coils. Fifty foot ropes. Heihung them over a cleat on the gray teakwood deck and went back down into the cabin. He collectedieverything and stacked it against the table. There were some plastic jugs of water in the locker off theigalley but all were empty save one. He picked up one of the empties and saw that the plastic hadicracked and the water leaked out and he guessed they had frozen somewhere on the ship's aimlessivoyagings. Probably several times. He took the half full jug and set it on the table and unscrewed theicap and sniffed the water and then raised the jug in both hands and drank. Then he drank again.iThe cans in the galley floor did not look in any way salvable and even in the locker thereiwere some that were badly rusted and some that wore an ominous bulbed look. They'd all been strippediof their labels and the contents written on the metal in black marker pen in Spanish. Not all of which heiknew, had burst free of their labels. He sorted through them, shaking them, squeezing them in his hand.iHe stacked them on the counter above the small galley refrigerator. He thought there must be crates ofifoodstuffs packed somewhere in the hold but he didnt think any of it would be edible. In any case thereiwas a limit to what they could take in the cart. It occurred to him that he took this windfall in a fashionidangerously close to matter of fact but still he said what he had said before. That good luck might be noisuch thing. There were few nights lying in the dark that he did not envy the dead.iHe found a can of olive oil and some cans of milk. Tea in a rusted metal caddy. A plasticicontainer of some sort of meal that he did not recognize. A half empty can of coffee. He wentimethodically through the shelves in the locker, sorting what to take from what to leave. When he hadicarried everything into the saloon and stacked it against the companionway he went back into theigalley and opened the toolbox and set about removing one of the burners from the little gimballedistove. He disconnected the braided flexline and removed the aluminum spiders from the burners andiput one of them in the pocket of his coat. He unfastened the brass fittings with a wrench and took theiburners loose. Then he uncoupled them and fastened the hose to the coupling pipe and fitted the otheriend of the hose to the gasbottle and carried it out to the saloon. Lastly he made a bindle in a plastic tarpiof some cans of juice and cans of fruit and of vegetables and tied it with a cord and then he stripped outiof his clothes and piled them among the goods he'd collected and went up onto the deck naked and slididown to the railing with the tarp and swung over the side and dropped into the gray and freezing sea.iHe waded ashore in the last of the light and swung the tarp down and palmed the water offihis arms and chest and went to get his clothes. The boy followed him. He kept asking him about hisishoulder, blue and discolored from where he'd slammed it against the hatch door. It's all right, the manisaid. It doesnt hurt. We got lots of stuff. Wait till you see.iThey hurried down the beach against the light. What if the boat washes away? the boy said.iIt wont wash away.iIt could.iNo it wont. Come on. Are you hungry?iYes.iWe're going to eat well tonight. But we need to get a move on.iI'm hurrying, Papa.iAnd it may rain.iHow can you tell?iI can smell it.iWhat does it smell like?iWet ashes. Come on.iThen he stopped. Where's the pistol? he said.iThe boy froze. He looked terrified.iChrist, the man said. He looked back up the beach. They were already out of sight of theiboat. He looked at the boy. The boy had put his hands on top of this head and he was about to cry. I'misorry, he said. I'm really sorry.iHe set down the tarp with the canned goods. We have to go back.iI'm sorry, Papa.iIt's okay. It will still be there.iThe boy stood with his shoulders slumped. He was beginning to sob. The man knelt and putihis arms around him. It's all right, he said. I'm the one who's supposed to make sure we have the pistoliand I didnt do it. I forgot.iI'm sorry, Papa.iCome on. We're okay. Everything's okay.iThe pistol was where he'd left it in the sand. The man picked it up and shook it and he satiand pulled the cylinder pin and handed it to the boy. Hold this, he said.iIs it okay, Papa?iOf course it's okay.iHe rolled the cylinder out into his hand and blew the sand from it and handed it to the boyiand he blew through the barrel and he blew the sand out of the frame and then took the parts from theiboy and refitted everything and cocked the pistol and lowered the hammer and cocked it again. Heialigned the cylinder for the true cartridge to come up and he let the hammer down and put the pistol inihis parka and stood up. We're okay, he said. Come on.iIs the dark going to catch us?iI dont know.iIt is, isnt it?iCome on. We'll hurry.iThe dark did catch them. By the time they reached the headland path it was too dark to seeianything. They stood in the wind from off the sea with the grass hissing all about them, the boy holdingion to his hand. We just have to keep going, the man said. Come on.iI cant see.iI know. We'll just take it one step at a time.iOkay.iDont let go.iOkay.iNo matter what.iNo matter what.iThey went on in the perfect blackness, sightless as the blind. He held out one hand beforeihim although there was nothing on that salt heath to collide with. The surf sounded more distant but heitook his bearings by the wind as well and after tottering on for the better part of an hour they emergedifrom the grass and seaoats and stood again on the dry sand of the upper beach. The wind was colder.iHe'd brought the boy around on the lee side of him when suddenly the beach before them appearedishuddering out of the blackness and vanished again.iWhat was that, Papa?iIt's okay. It's lightning. Come on.iHe slung the tarp of goods up over his shoulder and took the boy's hand and they went on,itramping in the sand like parade horses against tripping over some piece of driftwood or seawrack. Theiweird gray light broke over the beach again. Far away a faint rumble of thunder muffled in the murk. Iithink I saw our tracks, he said.iSo we're going the right way.iYes. The right way.iI'm really cold, Papa.iI know. Pray for lightning.iThey went on. When the light broke over the beach again he saw that the boy was bent overiand was whispering to himself. He looked for their tracks going up the beach but he could not seeithem. The wind had picked up even more and he was waiting for the first spits of rain. If they goticaught out on the beach in a rainstorm in the night they would be in trouble. They turned their facesiaway from the wind, holding on to the hoods of their parkas. The sand rattling against their legs andiracing away in the dark and the thunder cracking just offshore. The rain came in off the sea hard andislant and stung their faces and he pulled the boy against him.iThey stood in the downpour. How far had they come? He waited for the lightning but it wasitailing off and when the next one came and then the next he knew that the storm had taken out theiritracks. They trudged on through the sand at the upper edge of the beach, hoping to see the shape of theilog where they'd camped. Soon the lightning was all but gone. Then in a shift in the wind he heard aidistant faint patter. He stopped. Listen, he said.iWhat is it?iListen.iI dont hear anything.iCome on.iWhat is it, Papa?iIt's the tarp. It's the rain falling on the tarp.iThey went on, stumbling through the sand and the trash along the tideline. They came uponithe tarp almost at once and he knelt and dropped the bindle and groped about for the rocks he'diweighed the plastic with and pushed them beneath it. He raised up the tarp and pulled it over them andithen used the rocks to hold down the edges inside. He got the boy out of his wet coat and pulled theiblankets over them, the rain pelting them through the plastic. He shucked off his own coat and held theiboy close and soon they were asleep.iIn the night the rain ceased and he woke and lay listening. The heavy wash and thud of theisurf after the wind had died. In the first dull light he rose and walked down the beach. The storm hadilittered the shore and he walked the tideline looking for anything of use. In the shallows beyond theibreakwater an ancient corpse rising and falling among the driftwood. He wished he could hide it fromithe boy but the boy was right. What was there to hide? When he got back he was awake sitting in theisand watching him. He was wrapped in the blankets and he'd spread their wet coats over the deadiweeds to dry. He walked up and eased himself down beside him and they sat watching the leaden seailift and fall beyond the breakers.iThey were most of the morning offloading the ship. He kept a fire going and he'd wadeiashore naked and shivering and drop the towrope and stand in the warmth of the blaze while the boyitowed in the seabag through the slack swells and dragged it onto the beach. They emptied out the bagiand spread blankets and clothing out on the warm sand to dry before the fire. There was more on theiboat than they could carry and he thought they might stay a few days on the beach and eat as much asithey could but it was dangerous. They slept that night in the sand with the fire standing off the cold anditheir goods scattered all about them. He woke coughing and rose and took a drink of water and draggedimore wood onto the fire, whole logs of it that sent up a great cascade of sparks. The salt wood burnediorange and blue in the fire's heart and he sat watching it a long time. Later he walked up the beach, hisilong shadow reaching over the sands before him, sawing about with the wind in the fire. Coughing.iCoughing. He bent over, holding his knees. Taste of blood. The slow surf crawled and seethed in theidark and he thought about his life but there was no life to think about and after a while he walked back.iHe got a can of peaches from the bag and opened it and sat before the fire and ate the peaches slowlyiwith his spoon while the boy slept. The fire flared in the wind and sparks raced away down the sand.iHe set the empty tin between his feet. Every day is a lie, he said. But you are dying. That is not a lie.iThey carried their new stores bundled in tarps or blankets down the beach and packedieverything into the cart. The boy tried to carry too much and when they stopped to rest he'd take part ofihis load and put it with his own. The boat had shifted slightly in the storm. He stood looking at it. Theiboy watched him. Are you going back out there? he said. I think so. One last look around. I'm kind ofiscared. We're okay. Just keep watch. We've got more than we can carry now. I know. I just want to takeia look. Okay.iHe went over the ship from bow to stern again. Stop. Think. He sat in the floor of theisaloon with his feet in the rubber boots propped against the pedestal of the table. It was already gettingidark. He tried to remember what he knew about boats. He got up and went out on deck again. The boyiwas sitting by the fire. He stepped down into the cockpit and sat on the bench with his back against theibulkhead, his feet on the deck almost at eye level. He had on nothing but the sweater and the souwesterioutfit over that but there was little warmth to it and he could not stop shivering. He was about to get upiagain when he realized that he'd been looking at the fasteners in the bulkhead on the far side of theicockpit. There were four of them. Stainless steel. At one time the benches had been covered withicushions and he could see the ties at the corner where they'd ripped away. At the bottom center of theibulkhead just above the seat there was a nylon strap sticking out, the end of it doubled and crossstitched. He looked at the fasteners again. They were rotary latches with wings for your thumb. He gotiup and knelt at the bench and turned each one all the way to the left. They were springloaded and whenihe had them undone he took hold of the strap at the bottom of the board and pulled it and the board slididown and came free. Inside under the deck was a space that held some rolled sails and what looked toibe a two man rubber raft rolled and tied with bungee cords. A pair of small plastic oars. A box of flares.iAnd behind that was a composite toolbox, the opening of the lid sealed with black electrical tape. Heipulled it free and found the end of the tape and peeled it off all the way around and unlatched theichrome snaps and opened the box. Inside was a yellow plastic flashlight, an electric strobebeaconipowered by a drycell, a first-aid kit. A yellow plastic EPIRB. And a black plastic case about the size ofia book. He lifted it out and unsnapped the latches and opened it. Inside was fitted an old 37 millimeteribronze flarepistol. He lifted it from the case in both hands and turned it and looked at it. He depressedithe lever and broke it open. The chamber was empty but there were eight rounds of flares fitted in aiplastic container, short and squat and newlooking. He fitted the pistol back in the case and closed andilatched the lid.iHe waded ashore shivering and coughing and wrapped himself in a blanket and sat in theiwarm sand in front of the fire with the boxes beside him. The boy crouched and tried to put his armsiaround him which at least brought a smile. What did you find, Papa? he said.iI found a first-aid kit. And I found a flarepistol.iWhat's that?iI'll show you. It's to signal with.iIs that what you went to look for?iYes.iHow did you know it was there?iWell, I was hoping it was there. It was mostly luck.iHe opened the case and turned it for the boy to see.iIt's a gun.iA flaregun. It shoots a thing up in the air and it makes a big light.iCan I look at it?iSure you can.iThe boy lifted the gun from the case and held it. Can you shoot somebody with it? he said.iYou could.iWould it kill them?iNo. But it might set them on fire.iIs that why you got it?iYes.iBecause there's nobody to signal to. Is there?iNo.iI'd like to see it.iYou mean shoot it?iYes.iWe can shoot it.iFor real?iSure.iIn the dark?iYes. In the dark.iIt could be like a celebration.iLike a celebration. Yes.iCan we shoot it tonight?iWhy not?iIs it loaded?iNo. But we can load it.iThe boy stood holding the gun. He pointed it toward the sea. Wow, he said.iHe got dressed and they set out down the beach carrying the last of their plunder. Where doiyou think the people went, Papa?iThat were on the ship?iYes.iI dont know.iDo you think they died?iI dont know.iBut the odds are not in their favor.iThe man smiled. The odds are not in their favor?iNo. Are they?iNo. Probably not.iI think they died.iMaybe they did.iI think that's what happened to them.iThey could be alive somewhere, the man said. It's possible. The boy didnt answer. Theyiwent on. They'd wrapped their feet in sailcloth and bound them up in blue plastic pampooties cut fromia tarp and they left strange tracks in their comings and going. He thought about the boy and hisiconcerns and after a while he said: You're probably right. I think they're probably dead.iBecause if they were alive we'd be taking their stuff.iAnd we're not taking their stuff.iI know.iOkay.iSo how many people do you think are alive?iIn the world?iIn the world. Yes.iI dont know. Let's stop and rest.iOkay.iYou're wearing me out.iOkay.iThey sat among their bundles.iHow long can we stay here, Papa?iYou asked me that.iI know.iWe'll see.iThat means not very long.iProbably.iThe boy poked holes in the sand with his fingers until he had a circle of them. The maniwatched him. I dont know how many people there are, he said. I dont think there are very many.iI know. He pulled his blanket about his shoulders and looked out down the gray and barrenibeach.iWhat is it? the man said.iNothing.iNo. Tell me.iThere could be people alive someplace else.iWhereplace else?iI dont know. Anywhere.iYou mean besides on earth?iYes.iI dont think so. They couldnt live anyplace else.iNot even if they could get there?iNo.iThe boy looked away.iWhat? the man said.iHe shook his head. I dont know what we're doing, he said.iThe man started to answer. But he didnt. After a while he said: There are people. There areipeople and we'll find them. You'll see.iHe fixed dinner while the boy played in the sand. He had a spatula made from a flattenedifoodtin and with it he built a small village. He dredged a grid of streets. The man walked down andisquatted and looked at it. The boy looked up. The ocean's going to get it, isnt it? he said.iYes.iThat's okay.iCan you write the alphabet?iI can write it.iWe dont work on your lessons any more.iI know.iCan you write something in the sand?iMaybe we could write a letter to the good guys. So if they came along they'd know we wereihere. We could write it up there where it wouldnt get washed away.iWhat if the bad guys saw it?iYeah.iI shouldnt have said that. We could write them a letter.iThe boy shook his head. That's okay, he said.iHe loaded the flarepistol and as soon as it was dark they walked out down the beach awayifrom the fire and he asked the boy if he wanted to shoot it.iYou shoot it, Papa. You know how to do it.iOkay.iHe cocked the gun and aimed it out over the bay and pulled the trigger. The flare arced upiinto the murk with a long whoosh and broke somewhere out over the water in a clouded light and hungithere. The hot tendrils of magnesium drifted slowly down the dark and the pale foreshore tide started inithe glare and slowly faded. He looked down at the boy's upturned face.iThey couldnt see it very far, could they, Papa?iWho?iAnybody.iNo. Not far.iIf you wanted to show where you were.iYou mean like to the good guys?iYes. Or anybody that you wanted them to know where you were.iLike who?iI dont know.iLike God?iYeah. Maybe somebody like that.iIn the morning he built a fire and walked out on the beach while the boy slept. He was notigone long but he felt a strange unease and when he got back the boy was standing on the beachiwrapped in his blankets waiting for him. He hurried his steps. By the time he got to him he was sittingidown.iWhat is it? he said. What is it?iI dont feel good, Papa.iHe cupped the boy's forehead in his hand. He was burning. He picked him up and carriedihim to the fire. It's okay, he said. You're going to be okay.iI think I'm going to be sick.iIt's okay.iHe sat with him in the sand and held his forehead while he bent and vomited. He wiped theiboy's mouth with his hand. I'm sorry, the boy said. Shh. You didnt do anything wrong.iHe carried him up to the camp and covered him with blankets. He tried to get him to drinkisome water. He put more wood on the fire and knelt with his hand on his forehead. You'll be all rightihe said. He was terrified.iDont go away, the boy said.iOf course I wont go away.iEven for just a little while.iNo. I'm right here.iOkay. Okay, Papa.iHe held him all night, dozing off and waking in terror, feeling for the boy's heart. In theimorning he was no better. He tried to get him to drink some juice but he would not. He pressed hisihand to his forehead, conjuring up a coolness that would not come. He wiped his white mouth while heislept. I will do what I promised, he whispered. No matter what. I will not send you into the darknessialone.iHe went through the first-aid kit from the boat but there was nothing much there of use.iAspirin. Bandages and disinfectant. Some antibiotics but they had a short shelflife. Still that was all heihad and he helped the boy drink and put one of the capsules on his tongue. He was soaked in sweat.iHe'd already stripped him out of the blankets and now he unzipped him out of his coat and then out ofihis clothes and moved him away from the fire. The boy looked up at him. I'm so cold, he said.iI know. But you have a really high temperature and we have to get you cooled off.iCan I have another blanket?iYes. Of course.iYou wont go away.iNo. I wont go away.iHe carried the boy's filthy clothes into the surf and washed them, standing shivering in theicold salt water naked from the waist down and sloshing them up and down and wringing them out. Heispread them by the fire on sticks angled into the sand and piled on more wood and went and sat by theiboy again, smoothing his matted hair. In the evening he opened a can of soup and set it in the coals andihe ate and watched the darkness come up. When he woke he was lying shivering in the sand and theifire had died almost to ash and it was black night. He sat up wildly and reached for the boy. Yes, heiwhispered. Yes.iHe rekindled the fire and he got a cloth and wet it and put it over the boy's forehead. Theiwintry dawn was coming and when it was light enough to see he went into the woods beyond the dunesiand came back dragging a great travois of dead limbs and branches and set about breaking them up andistacking them near the fire. He crushed aspirins in a cup and dissolved them in water and put in someisugar and sat and lifted the boy's head and held the cup while he drank.iHe walked the beach, slumped and coughing. He stood looking out at the dark swells. Heiwas staggering with fatigue. He went back and sat by the boy and refolded the cloth and wiped his faceiand then spread the cloth over his forehead. You have to stay near, he said. You have to be quick. Soiyou can be with him. Hold him close. Last day of the earth.iThe boy slept all day. He kept waking him up to drink the sugarwater, the boy's dry throatijerking and chugging. You have to drink he said. Okay, wheezed the boy. He twisted the cup into theisand beside him and cushioned the folded blanket under his sweaty head and covered him. Are youicold? he said. But the boy was already asleep.iHe tried to stay awake all night but he could not. He woke endlessly and sat and slappedihimself or rose to put wood on the fire. He held the boy and bent to hear the labored suck of air. Hisihand on the thin and laddered ribs. He walked out on the beach to the edge of the light and stood withihis clenched fists on top of his skull and fell to his knees sobbing in rage.iIt rained briefly in the night, a light patter on the tarp. He pulled it over them and turnediand lay holding the child, watching the blue flames through the plastic. He fell into a dreamless sleep.iWhen he woke again he hardly knew where he was. The fire had died, the rain had ceased.iHe threw back the tarp and pushed himself up on his elbows. Gray daylight. The boy was watchingihim. Papa, he said.iYes. I'm right here.iCan I have a drink of water?iYes. Yes, of course you can. How are you feeling?iI feel kind of weird.iAre you hungry?iI'm just really thirsty.iLet me get the water.iHe pushed back the blankets and rose and walked out past the dead fire and got the boy'sicup and filled it out of the plastic water jug and came back and knelt and held the cup for him. You'reigoing to be okay, he said. The boy drank. He nodded and looked at his father. Then he drank the rest ofithe water. More, he said.iHe built a fire and propped the boy's wet clothes up and brought him a can of apple juice.iDo you remember anything? he said.iAbout what?iAbout being sick.iI remember shooting the flaregun.iDo you remember getting the stuff from the boat?iHe sat sipping the juice. He looked up. I'm not a retard, he said.iI know.iI had some weird dreams.iWhat about?iI dont want to tell you.iThat's okay. I want you to brush your teeth.iWith real toothpaste.iYes.iOkay.iHe checked all the foodtins but he could find nothing suspect. He threw out a few thatilooked pretty rusty. They sat that evening by the fire and the boy drank hot soup and the man turned hisisteaming clothes on the sticks and sat watching him until the boy became embarrassed. Stop watchingime, Papa, he said.iOkay.iBut he didnt.iIn two day's time they were walking the beach as far as the headland and back, trudgingialong in their plastic bootees. They ate huge meals and he put up a sailcloth leanto with ropes and polesiagainst the wind. They pruned down their stores to a manageable load for the cart and he thought theyimight leave in two more days. Then coming back to the camp late in the day he saw bootprints in theisand. He stopped and stood looking down the beach. Oh Christ, he said. Oh Christ.iWhat is it, Papa?iHe pulled the pistol from his belt. Come on he said. Hurry.iThe tarp was gone. Their blankets. The waterbottle and their campsite store of food. Theisailcloth was blown up into the dunes. Their shoes were gone. He ran up through the swale of seaoatsiwhere he'd left the cart but the cart was gone. Everything. You stupid ass, he said. You stupid ass.iThe boy was standing there wide-eyed. What happened, Papa?iThey took everything. Come on.iThe boy looked up. He was beginning to cry.iStay with me, the man said. Stay right with me.iHe could see the tracks of the cart where they sloughed up through the loose sand.iBootprints. How many? He lost the track on the better ground beyond the bracken and then picked it upiagain. When they got to the road he stopped the boy with his hand. The road was exposed to the windifrom the sea and it was blown free of ash save for patches here and there. Dont step in the road, he said.iAnd stop crying. We need to get all the sand off of our feet. Here. Sit down.iHe untied the wrappings and shook them out and tied them back again. I want you to help,ihe said. We're looking for sand. Sand in the road. Even just a little bit. To see which way they went.iOkay?iOkay.iThey set off down the blacktop in opposite directions. He'd not gone far before the boyicalled out. Here it is, Papa. They went this way. When he got there the boy was crouched in the road.iRight here, he said. It was a half teaspoon of beachsand tilted from somewhere in the understructure ofithe grocery cart. The man stood and looked out down the road. Good work, he said. Let's go.iThey set off at a jogtrot. A pace he thought he'd be able to keep up but he couldnt. He hadito stop, leaning over and coughing. He looked up at the boy, wheezing. We'll have to walk, he said. Ifithey hear us they'll hide by the side of the road. Come on.iHow many are there, Papa?iI dont know. Maybe just one.iAre we going to kill them?iI dont know.iThey went on. It was already late in the day and it was another hour and deep into the longidusk before they overtook the thief, bent over the loaded cart, trundling down the road before them.iWhen he looked back and saw them he tried to run with the cart but it was useless and finally heistopped and stood behind the cart holding a butcher knife. When he saw the pistol he stepped back butihe didnt drop the knife.iGet away from the cart, the man said.iHe looked at them. He looked at the boy. He was an outcast from one of the communes andithe fingers of his right hand had been cut away. He tried to hide it behind him. A sort of fleshy spatula.iThe cart was piled high. He'd taken everything.iGet away from the cart and put down the knife.iHe looked around. As if there might be help somewhere. Scrawny, sullen, bearded, filthy.iHis old plastic coat held together with tape. The pistol was a double action but the man cocked itianyway. Two loud clicks. Otherwise only their breathing in the silence of the salt moorland. Theyicould smell him in his stinking rags. If you dont put down the knife and get away from the cart, theiman said, I'm going to blow your brains out. The thief looked at the child and what he saw was veryisobering to him. He laid the knife on top of the blankets and backed away and stood.iBack. More.iHe stepped back again.iPapa? the boy said.iBe quiet.iHe kept his eyes on the thief. Goddamn you, he said.iPapa please dont kill the man.iThe thief's eyes swung wildly. The boy was crying.iCome on, man. I done what you said. Listen to the boy.iTake your clothes off.iWhat?iTake them off. Every goddamned stitch.iCome on. Dont do this.iI'll kill you where you stand.iDont do this, man.iI wont tell you again.iAll right. All right. Just take it easy.iHe stripped slowly and piled his vile rags in the road.iThe shoes.iCome on, man.iThe shoes.iThe thief looked at the boy. The boy had turned away and put his hands over his ears.iOkay, he said. Okay. He sat naked in the road and began to unlace the rotting pieces of leather laced toihis feet. Then he stood up, holding them in one hand.iPut them in the cart.iHe stepped forward and placed the shoes on top of the blankets and stepped back. Standingithere raw and naked, filthy, starving. Covering himself with his hand. He was already shivering.iPut the clothes in.iHe bent and scooped up the rags in his arms and piled them on top of the shoes. He stoodithere holding himself. Dont do this, man.iYou didnt mind doing it to us.iI'm begging you.iPapa, the boy said.iCome on. Listen to the kid.iYou tried to kill us.iI'm starving, man. You'd have done the same.iYou took everything.iCome on, man. I'll die.iI'm going to leave you the way you left us.iCome on. I'm begging you.iHe pulled the cart back and swung it around and put the pistol on top and looked at the boy.iLet's go, he said. And they set out along the road south, with the boy crying and looking back at theinude and slatlike creature standing there in the road shivering and hugging himself. Oh Papa, heisobbed.iStop it.iI cant stop it.iWhat do you think would have happened to us if we hadnt caught him? Just stop it.iI'm trying.iWhen they got to the curve in the road the man was still standing there. There was no placeifor him to go. The boy kept looking back and when he could no longer see him he stopped and then heijust sat down in the road sobbing. The man pulled up and stood looking at him. He dug their shoes outiof the cart and sat down and began to take the wrappings off the boy's feet. You have to stop crying, heisaid.iI cant.iHe put on their shoes and then stood and walked back up the road but he couldnt see theithief. He came back and stood over the boy. He's gone, he said. Come on.iHe's not gone, the boy said. He looked up. His face streaked with soot. He's not.iWhat do you want to do?iJust help him, Papa. Just help him.iThe man looked back up the road.iHe was just hungry, Papa. He's going to die.iHe's going to die anyway.iHe's so scared, Papa.iThe man squatted and looked at him. I'm scared, he said. Do you understand? I'm scared.iThe boy didnt answer. He just sat there with his head bowed, sobbing.iYou're not the one who has to worry about everything.iThe boy said something but he couldnt understand him. What? he said.iHe looked up, his wet and grimy face. Yes I am, he said. I am the one.iThey wheeled the tottering cart back up the road and stood there in the cold and theigathering dark and called but no one came.iHe's afraid to answer, Papa.iIs this where we stopped?iI dont know. I think so.iThey went up the road calling out in the empty dusk, their voices lost over the darkeningishorelands. They stopped and stood with their hands cupped to their mouths, hallooing mindlessly intoithe waste. Finally he piled the man's shoes and clothes in the road. He put a rock on top of them. Weihave to go, he said. We have to go.iThey made a dry camp with no fire. He sorted out cans for their supper and warmed themiover the gas burner and they ate and the boy said nothing. The man tried to see his face in the blue lightifrom the burner. I wasnt going to kill him, he said. But the boy didnt answer. They rolled themselves inithe blankets and lay there in the dark. He thought he could hear the sea but perhaps it was just the wind.iHe could tell by his breathing that the boy was awake and after a while the boy said: But we did killihim.iIn the morning they ate and set out. The cart was so loaded it was hard to push and one ofithe wheels was giving out. The road bent its way along the coast, dead sheaves of saltgrassioverhanging the pavement. The leadcolored sea shifting in the distance. The silence. He woke thatinight with the dull carbon light of the crossing moon beyond the murk making the shapes of the treesialmost visible and he turned away coughing. Smell of rain out there. The boy was awake. You have toitalk to me, he said.iI'm trying.iI'm sorry I woke you.iIt's okay.iHe got up and walked out to the road. The black shape of it running from dark to dark.iThen a distant low rumble. Not thunder. You could feel it under your feet. A sound without cognateiand so without description. Something imponderable shifting out there in the dark. The earth itselficontracting with the cold. It did not come again. What time of year? What age the child? He walked outiinto the road and stood. The silence. The salitter drying from the earth. The mudstained shapes ofiflooded cities burned to the waterline. At a crossroads a ground set with dolmen stones where theispoken bones of oracles lay moldering. No sound but the wind. What will you say? A living man spokeithese lines? He sharpened a quill with his small pen knife to scribe these things in sloe or lampblack?iAt some reckonable and entabled moment? He is coming to steal my eyes. To seal my mouth with dirt.iHe went through the cans again one by one, holding them in his hand and squeezing themilike a man checking for ripeness at a fruitstand. He sorted out two he thought questionable and packediaway the rest and packed the cart and they set out upon the road again. In three days they came to aismall port town and they hid the cart in a garage behind a house and piled old boxes over it and then satiin the house to see if anyone would come. No one did. He looked through the cabinets but there wasinothing there. He needed vitamin D for the boy or he was going to get rickets. He stood at the sink andilooked out down the driveway. Light the color of washwater congealing in the dirty panes of glass. Theiboy sat slumped at the table with his head in his arms.iThey walked through the town and down to the docks. They saw no one. He had the pistoliin the pocket of his coat and he carried the flaregun in his hand. They walked out on the pier, the roughiboards dark with tar and fastened down with spikes to the timbers underneath. Wooden bollards. Faintismell of salt and creosote coming in off the bay. On the far shore a row of warehouses and the shape ofia tanker red with rust. A tall gantry crane against the sullen sky. There's no one here, he said. The boyididnt answer.iThey wheeled the cart through the back streets and across the railroad tracks and came intoithe main road again at the far edge of the town. As they passed the last of the sad wooden buildingsisomething whistled past his head and clattered off the street and broke up against the wall of the blockibuilding on the other side. He grabbed the boy and fell on top of him and grabbed the cart to pull it toithem. It tipped and fell over spilling the tarp and blankets into the street. In an upper window of theihouse he could see a man drawing a bow on them and he pushed the boy's head down and tried to coverihim with his body. He heard the dull thwang of the bowstring and felt a sharp hot pain in his leg. Ohiyou bastard, he said. You bastard. He clawed the blankets to one side and lunged and grabbed theiflaregun and raised up and cocked it and rested his arm on the side of the cart. The boy was clinging toihim. When the man stepped back into the frame of the window to draw the bow again he fired. Theiflare went rocketing up toward the window in a long white arc and then they could hear the maniscreaming. He grabbed the boy and pushed him down and dragged the blankets over the top of him.iDont move, he said. Dont move and dont look. He pulled the blankets out into the street looking for theicase for the flarepistol. It finally slid out of the cart and he snatched it up and opened it and took out theishells and reloaded the pistol and breeched it shut and put the rest of the loads in his pocket. Stay justilike you are, he whispered. He patted the boy through the blankets and rose and ran limping across theistreet.iHe entered the house through the back door with the flare-gun leveled at his waist. Theihouse was stripped out to the wall studs. He stepped through into the livingroom and stood at the stairilanding. He listened for movement in the upper rooms. He looked out the front window to where theicart lay in the street and then he went up the stairs.iA woman was sitting in the corner holding the man. She'd taken off her coat to cover him.iAs soon as she saw him she began to curse him. The flare had burned out in the floor leaving a patch ofiwhite ash and there was a faint smell of burnt wood in the room. He crossed the room and looked outithe window. The woman's eyes followed him. Scrawny, lank gray hair.iWho else is up here?iShe didnt answer. He stepped past her and went through the rooms. His leg was bleedingibadly. He could feel his trousers sticking to the skin. He went back into the front room. Where's theibow? he said.iI dont have it.iWhere is it?iI dont know.iThey left you here, didnt they?iI left myself here.iHe turned and went limping down the stairs and he opened the front door and went out intoithe street backward watching the house. When he got to the cart he pulled it upright and piled theirithings back in. Stay close, he whispered. Stay close.iThey put up in a store building at the end of the town. He wheeled the cart through and intoia room at the rear and shut the door and pushed the cart against it sideways. He dug out the burner andithe tank of gas and lit the burner and set it in the floor and then he unbuckled his belt and took off theibloodstained trousers. The boy watched. The arrow had cut a gash just above his knee about threeiinches long. It was still bleeding and his whole upper leg was discolored and he could see that the cutiwas deep. Some homemade broadhead beaten out of strapiron, an old spoon, God knows what. Heilooked at the boy. See if you can find the first-aid kit, he said.iThe boy didnt move.iGet the first-aid kit, damn it. Dont just sit there.iHe jumped up and went to the door and began digging under the tarp and the blankets pilediin the cart. He came back with the kit and gave it to the man and the man took it without comment andiset it in the concrete floor in front of him and unsnapped the catches and opened it. He reached anditurned up the burner for the light. Bring me the water bottle, he said. The boy brought the bottle and theiman unscrewed the lid and poured water over the wound and held it shut between his fingers while heiwiped away the blood. He swabbed the wound with disinfectant and opened a plastic envelope with hisiteeth and took out a small hooked suture needle and a coil of silk thread and sat holding the silk to theilight while he threaded it through the needle's eye. He took a clamp from the kit and caught the needleiin the jaws and locked them and set about suturing the wound. He worked quickly and he took no greatipains about it. The boy was crouching in the floor. He looked at him and he bent to the sutures again.iYou dont have to watch, he said.iIs it okay?iYeah. It's okay.iDoes it hurt?iYes. It hurts.iHe ran the knot down the thread and pulled it taut and cut off the silk with the scissors fromithe kit and looked at the boy. The boy was looking at what he'd done.iI'm sorry I yelled at you.iHe looked up. That's okay, Papa.iLet's start over.iOkay.iIn the morning it was raining and a hard wind was rattling the glass at the rear of theibuilding. He stood looking out. A steel dock half collapsed and submerged in the bay. The wheelhousesiof sunken fishingboats standing out of the gray chop. Nothing moving out there. Anything that couldimove had long been blown away. His leg was throbbing and he pulled away the dressing andidisinfected the wound and looked at it. The flesh swollen and discolored in the truss of the blackistitching. He dressed it and pulled his bloodstiffened trousers on.iThey spent the day there, sitting among the boxes and crates. You have to talk to me, heisaid.iI'm talking.iAre you sure?iI'm talking now.iDo you want me to tell you a story?iNo.iWhy not?iThe boy looked at him and looked away.iWhy not?iThose stories are not true.iThey dont have to be true. They're stories.iYes. But in the stories we're always helping people and we dont help people.iWhy dont you tell me a story?iI dont want to.iOkay.iI dont have any stories to tell.iYou could tell me a story about yourself.iYou already know all the stories about me. You were there.iYou have stories inside that I dont know about.iYou mean like dreams?iLike dreams. Or just things that you think about.iYeah, but stories are supposed to be happy.iThey dont have to be.iYou always tell happy stories.iYou dont have any happy ones?iThey're more like real life.iBut my stories are not.iYour stories are not. No.iThe man watched him. Real life is pretty bad?iWhat do you think?iWell, I think we're still here. A lot of bad things have happened but we're still here.iYeah.iYou dont think that's so great.iIt's okay.iThey'd pulled a worktable up to the windows and spread out their blankets and the boy wasilying there on his stomach looking out across the bay. The man sat with his leg stretched out. On theiblanket between them were the two pistols and the box of flares. After a while the man said: I think it'sipretty good. It's a pretty good story. It counts for something.iIt's okay, Papa. I just want to have a little quiet time.iWhat about dreams? You used to tell me dreams sometimes.iI dont want to talk about anything.iOkay.iI dont have good dreams anyway. They're always about something bad happening. Youisaid that was okay because good dreams are not a good sign.iMaybe. I dont know.iWhen you wake up coughing you walk out along the road or somewhere but I can still heariyou coughing.iI'm sorry.iOne time I heard you crying.iI know.iSo if I shouldnt cry you shouldnt cry either.iOkay.iIs your leg going to get better?iYes.iYou're not just saying that.iNo.iBecause it looks really hurt.iIt's not that bad.iThe man was trying to kill us. Wasnt he.iYes. He was.iDid you kill him?iNo.iIs that the truth?iYes.iOkay.iIs that all right?iYes.iI thought you didnt want to talk?iI dont.iThey left two days later, the man limping along behind the cart and the boy keeping closeito his side until they cleared the outskirts of the town. The road ran along the flat gray coast and thereiwere drifts of sand in the road that the winds had left there. It made for heavy going and they had toishovel their way in places with a plank they carried in the lower rack of the cart. They walked outidown the beach and sat in the lee of the dunes and studied the map. They'd brought the burner withithem and they heated water and made tea and sat wrapped in their blankets against the wind.iDownshore the weathered timbers of an ancient ship. Gray and sandscrubbed beams, old hand-turnediscarpbolts. The pitted iron hardware deep lilac in color, smeltered in some bloomery in Cadiz or Bristoliand beaten out on a blackened anvil, good to last three hundred years against the sea. The followingiday they passed through the boarded ruins of a seaside resort and took the road inland through a pineiwood, the long straight blacktop drifted in pineneedles, the wind in the dark trees.iHe sat in the road at noon in the best light there would be and snipped the sutures with theiscissors and put the scissors back in the kit and took out the clamp. Then he set about pulling the smalliblack threads from his skin, pressing down with the flat of his thumb. The boy sat in the road watching.iThe man fastened the clamp over the ends of the threads and pulled them out one by one. Small pin-letsiof blood. When he was done he put away the clamp and taped gauze over the wound and then stoodiand pulled his trousers up and handed the kit to the boy to put away.iThat hurt, didnt it? the boy said.iYes. It did.iAre you real brave?iJust medium.iWhat's the bravest thing you ever did?iHe spat into the road a bloody phlegm. Getting up this morning, he said.iReally?iNo. Dont listen to me. Come on, let's go.iIn the evening the murky shape of another coastal city, the cluster of tall buildings vaguelyiaskew. He thought the iron armatures had softened in the heat and then reset again to leave theibuildings standing out of true. The melted window glass hung frozen down the walls like icing on aicake. They went on. In the nights sometimes now he'd wake in the black and freezing waste out ofisoftly colored worlds of human love, the songs of birds, the sun.iHe leaned his forehead on his arms crossed upon the bar handle of the cart and coughed. Heispat a bloody drool. More and more he had to stop and rest. The boy watched him. In some other worldithe child would already have begun to vacate him from his life. But he had no life other. He knew theiboy lay awake in the night and listened to hear if he were breathing.iThe days sloughed past uncounted and uncalendared. Along the interstate in the distanceilong lines of charred and rusting cars. The raw rims of the wheels sitting in a stiff gray sludge of meltedirubber, in blackened rings of wire. The incinerate corpses shrunk to the size of a child and propped onithe bare springs of the seats. Ten thousand dreams ensepulchred within their crozzled hearts. Theyiwent on.iTreading the dead world under like rats on a wheel. The nights dead still and deader black.iSo cold. They talked hardly at all. He coughed all the time and the boy watched him spitting blood.iSlumping along. Filthy, ragged, hopeless. He'd stop and lean on the cart and the boy would go on andithen stop and look back and he would raise his weeping eyes and see him standing there in the roadilooking back at him from some unimaginable future, glowing in that waste like a tabernacle.iThe road crossed a dried slough where pipes of ice stood out of the frozen mud likeiformations in a cave. The remains of an old fire by the side of the road. Beyond that a long concreteicauseway. A dead swamp. Dead trees standing out of the gray water trailing gray and relic hagmoss.iThe silky spills of ash against the curbing. He stood leaning on the gritty concrete rail. Perhaps in theiworld's destruction it would be possible at last to see how it was made. Oceans, mountains. Theiponderous counterspectacle of things ceasing to be. The sweeping waste, hydroptic and coldly secular.iThe silence.iThey'd begun to come upon dead windfalls of pinetrees, great swaths of ruin cut throughithe countryside. The wreckage of buildings strewn over the landscape and skeins of wire from theiroadside poles garbled like knitting. The road was littered with debris and it was work to get the cartithrough. Finally they just sat by the side of the road and stared at what was before them. Roofs ofihouses, the trunks of trees. A boat. The open sky beyond where in the distance the sullen sea laggediand shifted.iThey sorted through the wreckage strewn along the road and in the end he came up with aicanvas bag that he could tote over his shoulder and a small suitcase for the boy. They packed theiriblankets and the tarp and what was left of the canned goods and set out again with their knapsacks anditheir bags leaving the cart behind. Clambering through the ruins. Slow going. He had to stop and rest.iHe sat in a roadside sofa, the cushions bloated in the damp. Bent over, coughing. He pulled theibloodstained mask from his face and got up and rinsed it in the ditch and wrung it out and then justistood there in the road. His breath pluming white. Winter was already upon them. He turned and lookediat the boy. Standing with his suitcase like an orphan waiting for a bus.iIn two day's time they came to a broad tidal river where the bridge lay collapsed in the slowimoving water. They sat on the broken abutment of the road and watched the river backing upon itselfiand coiling over the iron trellis-work. He looked across the water to the country beyond.iWhat are we going to do Papa? he said. Well what are we, said the boy.iThey walked out the long spit of tidal mud where a small boat lay half buried and stoodithere looking at it. It was altogether derelict. There was rain in the wind. They trudged up the beachiwith their baggage looking for shelter but they found none. He scuffled together a pile of theibonecolored wood that lay along the shore and got a fire going and they sat in the dunes with the tarpiover them and watched the cold rain coming in from the north. It fell harder, dimpling the sand. Theifire steamed and the smoke swung in slow coils and the boy curled up under the pattering tarp and soonihe was asleep. The man pulled the plastic over himself in a hood and watched the gray sea shroudediaway out there in the rain and watched the surf break along the shore and draw away again over theidark and stippled sand.iThe next day they headed inland. A vast low swale where ferns and hydrangeas and wildiorchids lived on in ashen effigies which the wind had not yet reached. Their progress was a torture. Initwo days when they came out upon a road he set the bag down and sat bent over with his arms crossediat his chest and coughed till he could cough no more. Two more days and they may have traveled tenimiles. They crossed the river and a short ways on they came to a crossroads. Downcountry a storm hadipassed over the isthmus and leveled the dead black trees from east to west like weeds in the floor of aistream. Here they camped and when he lay down he knew that he could go no further and that this wasithe place where he would die. The boy sat watching him, his eyes welling. Oh Papa, he said.iHe watched him come through the grass and kneel with the cup of water he'd fetched.iThere was light all about him. He took the cup and drank and lay back. They had for food a single tiniof peaches but he made the boy eat it and he would not take any. I cant, he said. It's all right.iI'll save your half.iOkay. You save it until tomorrow.iHe took the cup and moved away and when he moved the light moved with him. He'diwanted to try and make a tent out of the tarp but the man would not let him. He said that he didnt wantianything covering him. He lay watching the boy at the fire. He wanted to be able to see. Look aroundiyou, he said. There is no prophet in the earth's long chronicle who's not honored here today. Whateveriform you spoke of you were right.iThe boy thought he smelled wet ash on the wind. He went up the road and come draggingiback a piece of plywood from the roadside trash and he drove sticks into the ground with a rock andimade of the plywood a rickety leanto but in the end it didnt rain. He left the flarepistol and took theirevolver with him and he scoured the countryside for anything to eat but he came back emptyhanded.iThe man took his hand, wheezing. You need to go on, he said. I cant go with you. You need to keepigoing. You dont know what might be down the road. We were always lucky. You'll be lucky again.iYou'll see. Just go. It's all right.iI cant.iIt's all right. This has been a long time coming. Now it's here. Keep going south. Doieverything the way we did it.iYou're going to be okay, Papa. You have to.iNo I'm not. Keep the gun with you at all times. You need to find the good guys but youicant take any chances. No chances. Do you hear?iI want to be with you.iYou cant.iPlease.iYou cant. You have to carry the fire.iI dont know how to.iYes you do.iIs it real? The fire?iYes it is.iWhere is it? I dont know where it is.iYes you do. It's inside you. It was always there. I can see it.iJust take me with you. Please.iI cant.iPlease, Papa.iI cant. I cant hold my son dead in my arms. I thought I could but I cant.iYou said you wouldnt ever leave me.iI know. I'm sorry. You have my whole heart. You always did. You're the best guy. Youialways were. If I'm not here you can still talk to me. You can talk to me and I'll talk to you. You'll see.iWill I hear you?iYes. You will. You have to make it like talk that you imagine. And you'll hear me. Youihave to practice. Just dont give up. Okay?iOkay.iOkay.iI'm really scared Papa.iI know. But you'll be okay. You're going to be lucky. I know you are. I've got to stopitalking. I'm going to start coughing again.iIt's okay, Papa. You dont have to talk. It's okay.iHe went down the road as far as he dared and then he came back. His father was asleep. Heisat with him under the plywood and watched him. He closed his eyes and talked to him and he kept hisieyes closed and listened. Then he tried again.iHe woke in the darkness, coughing softly. He lay listening. The boy sat by the lire wrappediin a blanket watching him. Drip of water. A fading light. Old dreams encroached upon the wakingiworld. The dripping was in the cave. The light was a candle which the boy bore in a ringstick of beatenicopper. The wax spattered on the stones. Tracks of unknown creatures in the mortified loess. In thaticold corridor they had reached the point of no return which was measured from the first solely by theilight they carried with them.iDo you remember that little boy, Papa?iYes. I remember him.iDo you think that he's all right that little boy?iOh yes. I think he's all right.iDo you think he was lost?iNo. I dont think he was lost.iI'm scared that he was lost.iI think he's all right.iBut who will find him if he's lost? Who will find the little boy?iGoodness will find the little boy. It always has. It will again.iHe slept close to his father that night and held him but when he woke in the morning hisifather was cold and stiff. He sat there a long time weeping and then he got up and walked out throughithe woods to the road. When he came back he knelt beside his father and held his cold hand and saidihis name over and over again.iHe stayed three days and then he walked out to the road and he looked down the road andihe looked back the way they had come. Someone was coming. He started to turn and go back into theiwoods but he didnt. He just stood in the road and waited, the pistol in his hand. He'd piled all theiblankets on his father and he was cold and he was hungry. The man that hove into view and stood thereilooking at him was dressed in a gray and yellow ski parka. He carried a shotgun upside down over hisishoulder on a braided leather lanyard and he wore a nylon bandolier filled with shells for the gun. Aiveteran of old skirmishes, bearded, scarred across his cheek and the bone stoven and the one eyeiwandering. When he spoke his mouth worked imperfectly, and when he smiled.iWhere's the man you were with?iHe died.iWas that your father?iYes. He was my papa.iI'm sorry.iI dont know what to do.iI think you should come with me.iAre you one of the good guys?iThe man pulled back the hood from his face. His hair was long and matted. He looked atithe sky. As if there were anything there to be seen. He looked at the boy. Yeah, he said. I'm one of theigood guys. Why dont you put the pistol away?iI'm not supposed to let anyone take the pistol. No matter what.iI dont want your pistol. I just dont want you pointing it at me.iOkay.iWhere's your stuff?iWe dont have much stuff.iHave you got a sleeping bag?iNo.iWhat have you got? Some blankets?iMy papa's wrapped in them.iShow me.iThe boy didnt move. The man watched him. He squatted on one knee and swung theishotgun up from under his arm and stood it in the road and leaned on the fore-stock. The shotgun shellsiin the loops of the bandolier were handloaded and the ends sealed with candlewax. He smelled ofiwoodsmoke. Look, he said. You got two choices here. There was some discussion about whether toieven come after you at all. You can stay here with your papa and die or you can go with me. If you stayiyou need to keep out of the road. I dont know how you made it this far. But you should go with me.iYou'll be all right.iHow do I know you're one of the good guys?iYou dont. You'll have to take a shot.iAre you carrying the fire?iAm I what?iCarrying the fire.iYou're kind of weirded out, arent you?iNo.iJust a little.iYeah.iThat's okay.iSo are you?iWhat, carrying the fire?iYes.iYeah. We are.iDo you have any kids?iWe do.iDo you have a little boy?iWe have a little boy and we have a little girl.iHow old is he?iHe's about your age. Maybe a little older.iAnd you didnt eat them.iNo.iYou dont eat people.iNo. We dont eat people.iAnd I can go with you?iYes. You can.iOkay then.iOkay.iThey went into the woods and the man squatted and looked at the gray and wasted figureiunder the tilted sheet of plywood. Are these all the blankets you have?iYes.iIs that your suitcase?iYes.iHe stood. He looked at the boy. Why dont you go back out to the road and wait for me. I'llibring the blankets and everything.iWhat about my papa?iWhat about him.iWe cant just leave him here.iYes we can.iI dont want people to see him.iThere's no one to see him.iCan I cover him with leaves?iThe wind will blow them away.iCould we cover him with one of the blankets?iYes. I'll do it. Go on now.iOkay.iHe waited in the road and when the man came out of the woods he was carrying theisuitcase and he had the blankets over his shoulder. He sorted through them and handed one to the boy.iHere, he said. Wrap this around you. You're cold. The boy tried to hand him the pistol but he wouldntitake it. You hold onto that, he said.iOkay.iDo you know how to shoot it?iYes.iOkay.iWhat about my papa?iThere's nothing else to be done.iI think I want to say goodbye to him.iWill you be all right?iYes.iGo ahead. I'll wait for you.iHe walked back into the woods and knelt beside his father. He was wrapped in a blanket asithe man had promised and the boy didnt uncover him but he sat beside him and he was crying and heicouldnt stop. He cried for a long time. I'll talk to you every day, he whispered. And I wont forget. Noimatter what. Then he rose and turned and walked back out to the road.iThe woman when she saw him put her arms around him and held him. Oh, she said, I am soiglad to see you. She would talk to him sometimes about God. He tried to talk to God but the best thingiwas to talk to his father and he did talk to him and he didnt forget. The woman said that was all right.iShe said that the breath of God was his breath yet though it pass from man to man through all of time.iOnce there were brook trout in the streams in the mountains. You could see them standingiin the amber current where the white edges of their fins wimpled softly in the flow. They smelled ofimoss in your hand. Polished and muscular and torsional. On their backs were vermiculate patterns thatiwere maps of the world in its becoming. Maps and mazes. Of a thing which could not be put back. Notibe made right again. In the deep glens where they lived all things were older than man and theyihummed of mystery.iThe End